

s O N N E T LX.
TO AN AMIABLE GIRL.

MIRANDA! mark where shrinking from the gale,
Its filken leaves yet moist with early dew,
That fair faint flower, the Lily of the Vale
Droops its meek head, and looks, methinks, like you!
Wrapped in a shadowy veil of tender green,
Its snowy bells a soft perfume dispense,
And bending as reluctant to be seen, .
In simple loveliness it fooths the sense.
With bosom bared to meet the garish day,
The glaring Tulip, gaudy, undismayed,
Offends the eye of taste ; that turns away
To seek the Lily in her fragrant shade.
With such unconscious beauty, pensive, mild,
Miranda charms—Nature's soft modest child.


sONNET LXI.
sUPPOsED TO HAVE BEEN WRITTEN IN AMERICA,

ILL-omened bird! whose cries portentous float
over yon savannah with the mournful wind;
While, as the Indian hears your piercing note,
Dark dread of future evil fills his mind;
Wherefore with early lamentation break
The dear delusive visions of repose ?
Why from so short felicity awake
My wounded senses to substantial woes?
over my fick soul thus roused from transient rest,
Pale superstition sheds her influence drear,
And to my shuddering fancy would suggest
Thou com'st to speak of ev'ry woe I fear.
Ah! Reason little over the soul prevails,
When, from ideal ill, the enfeebled fpirit fails !

sONNET LXII.
WRITTEN ON PAssING BY MOON-LIGHT THROUGH
A VILLAGE, WHILE THE GROUND WAs
COVERED WITH sNOW.

WHILE thus I wander, cheerless and unblest,
And find in change of place but change of pain;
In tranquil sleep the village labourers rest,
And taste that quiet I pursue in vain !
Hushed is the hamlet now, and faintly gleam
The dying embers, from the casement low
Of the thatched cottage ; while the Moon's wan beam
Lends a new lustre to the dazzling snow
over the cold waste, amid the freezing night,
scarce heeding whither, desolate I stray ;
For me, pale Eye of Evening, thy soft light
Leads to no happy home; my weary way
Ends but in fad vicissitudes of care:
I only fly from doubt-to meet despair !


sONNET LXIII.
THE GOssAMER.

OVER faded heath-flowers spun, or thorny furze,
The filmy Gossamer is lightly spread ;
Waving in every sighing air that stirs,
As Fairy fingers had entwined the thread :
A thousand trembling orbs of lucid dew
spangle the texture of the fairy loom,
As if foft sylphs, lamenting as they flew,
Had wept departed summer's transient bloom:
But the wind rises, and the turf receives
The glittering web :-so, evanescent, fade
Bright views that Youth with fanguine heart, believes :
so vanish schemes of bliss, by Fancy made ;
Which, fragile as the fleeting dreams of morn,
Leave but the withered heath, and barren thorn!

sONNET LXIV.
WRITTEN AT BRIsTOL IN THE sUMMER OF 1794.

HERE from the restless bed of lingering pain
The languid sufferer seeks the tepid wave,
And feels returning health and hope again
Disperse “ the gathering shadows of the grave !"
And here romantic rocks that boldly swell,
Fringed with green woods, or stained with veins of ore,
Called native Genius forth, whose Heav'n-taught skill
Charmed the deep echos of the rifted shore.
But tepid waves, wild scenes, or summer air,
Restore they palsied Fancy, woe-deprest ?
Check they the torpid influence of Despair,
Or bid warm Health re-animate the breast;
Where Hope's soft visions have no longer part,
And whose fad inmate is a broken heart ?

sONNET LXV.
TO DR. PARRY OF BATH, WITH sOME BOTANIC
DRAWINGs WHICH HAD BEEN MADE sOME
YEARs.

IN happier hours, ere yet so keenly blew
Adversity's cold blight, and bitter storms,
Luxuriant summer's evanescent forms,
And spring's soft blooms with pencil light I drew :
But as the lovely family of flowers
shrink from the bleakness of the Northern blast,
so fail from present care and sorrow past
The flight botanic pencil's mimic powers-
Nor will kind Fancy even by Memory's aid,
Her visionary garlands now entwine ;
Yet while the wreaths of Hope and Pleasure fade,
still is one flower of deathless blossom mine,
That dares the lapse of Time, and Tempest rude,
The unfading Amaranth of Gratitude.

sONNET LXVI.
WRITTEN IN A TEMPEsTUOUs NIGHT, ON THE
COAsT OF sUssEX.

THE night-flood rakes upon the stony shore ;
Along the rugged cliffs and chalky caves
Mourns the hoarse Ocean, seeming to deplore
All that are buried in his restless waves
Mined by corrosive tides, the hollow rock
Falls prone, and rushing from its turfy height,
shakes the broad beach with long-resounding shock,
Loud thundering on the ear of sullen Night ;
Above the desolate and stormy deep,
Gleams the wan Moon, by floating mist opprest ;
Yet here while youth, and health, and labour sleep,
Alone I wander-Calm untroubled rest,
“ Nature's soft nurse," deserts the figh-swoln breast,
And shuns the eyes, that only wake to weep !


sONNET LXVII.

ON PAssING OVER A DREARY TRACT OF COUNTRY,
AND NEAR THE RUINs OF A DEsERTED
CHAPEL, DURING A TEMPEsT.

sWIFT fleet the billowy clouds along the sky,
Earth seems to shudder at the storm aghast ;
While only beings as forlorn as I,
Court the chill horrors of the howling blast.
Even round yon crumbling walls, in search of food,
The ravenous Owl foregoes his evening flight,
And in his cave, within the deepest wood,
The Fox eludes the tempest of the night.
But to my heart congenial is the gloom
Which hides me from a World I wish to shun;
That scene where Ruin saps the mouldering tomb,
suits with the sadness of a wretch undone.
Nor is the deepest shade, the keenest air,
Black as my fate, or cold as my despair.


sONNET LXVIII.
WRITTEN AT EXMOUTH, MIDsUMMER

FALL, dews of Heaven, upon my burning breast,
Bathe with cool drops these ever-streaming eyes ;
Ye gentle Winds, that fan the balmy West,
With the soft rippling tide of morning rise,
And calm my bursting heart, as here I keep
The vigil of the wretched Now away
Fade the pale stars, as wavering over the deep
soft rosy tints announce another day,
The day of Middle summer !--Ah! in vain
To those who mourn like me, does radiant June
Lead on her fragrant hours; for hopeless pain
Darkens with sullen clouds the sun of Noon,
And veiled in shadows Nature's face appears
To hearts overwhelmed with grief, to eyes suffused with
tears.

sONNET LXIX.
WRITTEN AT THE sAME PLACE, ON sEEING A
sEAMAN RETURN WHO HAD Been
IMPRIsONED AT ROCHFORT.

CLOUDs, gold and purple, over the westering ray
Threw a bright veil, and catching lights between,
Fell on the glancing sail, that we had seen
With soft, but adverse winds, throughout the day
Contending vainly: as the vessel nears,
Encreasing numbers hail it from the shore;
Lo! on the deck a pallid form appears,
Half wondering to behold himself once more
Approach his home And now he can discern
His cottage thatch amid surrounding trees ;
Yet, trembling, dreads least sorrow or disease
Await him there, embittering his return :
But all he loves are safe; with heart elate,
Tho' poor and plundered, he absolves his fate!


sONNET LXX.
ON BEING CAUTIONED AGAINsT WALKING ON AN
HEADLAND OVERLOOKING THE sEA, BECAUsE
IT WAs FREQUENTED BY A LUNATIC.


Is there a solitary wretch who hies
To the tall cliff, with starting pace or flow,
And, measuring, views with wild and hollow eyes
Its distance from the waves that chide below;
Who, as the sea-born gale with frequent sighs
Chills his cold bed upon the mountain turf,
With hoarse, half uttered lamentation, lies
Murmuring responses to the dashing surf ?
In moody fadness, on the giddy brink,
I see him more with envy than with fear;
He has no nice felicities that shrink
From giant horrors; wildly wandering here,
He seems (uncursed with reason) not to know
The depth or the duration of his woe.

sONNET LXXI.
WRITTEN AT WEYMOUTH IN WINTER.

THE chill waves whiten in the sharp North-east ;
Cold, cold the night-blast comes, with fullen sound,
And black and gloomy, like my cheerless breast :
Frowns the dark pier and lonely sea-view round.
Yet a few months—and on the peopled strand
Pleasure shall all her varied forms display ;
Nymphs lightly tread the bright reflecting sand,
And proud fails whiten all the summer bay:
Then, for these winds that whistle keen and bleak,
Music's delightful melodies shall float
over the blue waters; but 'tis mine to seek
Rather, some unfrequented shade, remote
From sights and sounds of gaiety- I mourn
All that gave me delight- Ah! never to return!

sONNET LXXII.
TO THE MORNING sTAR.

THEE! lucid arbiter 'twixt day and night,
The seaman greets, as on the Ocean stream
Reflected, thy precursive friendly beam
Points out the long-fought haven to his fight.
Watching for thee, the lover's ardent eyes
Turn to the eastern hills ; and as above
Thy brilliance trembles, hails the lights that rise
To guide his footsteps to expecting love !
I mark thee too, as night's dark clouds retire,
And thy bright radiance glances on the sea ;
But never more shall thy heraldic fire
speak of approaching morn with joy to me!
Quenched in the gloom of death that heavenly ray
Once lent to light me on my thorny way!


sONNET LXXIII.
TO A QUERULOUs ACQUAINTANCE.

THOU! whom Prosperity has always led
over level paths, with moss and flow’rets strewn;
For whom she still prepares a downy bed
With roses scattered, and to thorns unknown,
Wilt thou yet murmur at a mis-placed leaf ?
Think, ere thy irritable nerves repine,
How many, born with feelings keen as thine,
Taste all the sad vicissitudes of grief ;
How many steep in tears their scanty bread;
Or, loft to reason, sorrow's victims ! rave:
How many know not where to lay their head ;
While some are driven by anguish to the grave!
Think; nor impatient at a feather's weight,
Mar the uncommon blessings of thy fate !

sONNET LXXIV.

THE WINTER NIGHT.

“sLEEP, that knits up the ravelled sleeve of care,"
Forsakes me, while the chill and sullen blast,
As my sad soul recalls its sorrows past,
seems like a summons, bidding me prepare
For the last sleep of death_Murmuring I hear
The hollow wind around the ancient towers,
While night and silence reign ; and cold and drear
The darkest gloom of Middle Winter lours ;
But, wherefore fear existence such as mine,
To change for long and undisturbed repose ?
Ah! when this suffering being I resign,
And over my miseries the tomb shall close,
By her, whose loss in anguish I deplore,
I shall be laid, and feel that loss no more!

sONNET Lxxv

WHERE the wild woods and pathless forests frown,
The darkling Pilgrim seeks his unknown way,
Till on the grass he throws him weary down,
To wait in broken seep the dawn of day :
Thro' boughs just waving in the filent air,
With pale capricious light the summer Moon
Chequers his humid couch ; while Fancy there,
That loves to wanton in the Night's deep noon,
Calls from the mossy roots and fountain edge
Fair visionary Nymphs that haunt the shade,
Or Naiads rising from the whispering sedge :
And, 'mid the beauteous group, his dear loved maid
seems beckoning him with smiles to join the train :
Then, starting from his dream, he feels his woes again!


sONNET LXXVI.
TO A YOUNG MAN ENTERING THE WORLD. 

GO now, ingenuous Youth !—The trying hour .
Is come : The World demands that thou shouldst go
To active life : There titles, wealth and power
May all be purchasidYet I joy to know
Thou wilt not pay their price. The base controul
Of petty despots in their pedant reign
Already hast thou felt ;- and high disdain
Of Tyrants is imprinted on thy soul-
Not, where mistaken Glory, in the field
Rears her red banner, be thou ever found;
But, against proud Oppression raise the shield
Of Patriot daring— so shalt thou renowned
For the best virtues live ; or that denied
May'st die, as Hampden or as sydney died !


sONNET LxxvH
TO THE INsECT OF THE GOssAMER,

sMALL, viewless Æronaut, that by the line
Of Gossamer suspended, in mid air
Float'st on a fun beam-Living Atom, where
Ends thy breeze-guided voyage ;-with what design
In Æther dost thou launch thy form minute,
Mocking the eye ?--Alas! before the veil
Of denser clouds shall hide thee, the pursuit
Of the keen swift may end thy fairy fail!
Thus on the golden thread that Fancy weaves
Buoyant, as Hope's illusive flattery breathes,
The young and visionary Poet leaves
Life's dull realities, while sevenfold wreaths
Of rainbow-light around his head revolve.
Ah! soon at sorrow's touch the radiant dreams diffolve!


sONNET LXXVIII
sNOWDROPs.

WAN Heralds of the sun and summer gale!
That seem just fallen from infant Zephyrs' wing ;
Not now, as once, with heart revived I hail
Your modest buds, that for the brow of spring ;
Form the first simple garland-Now no more
Escaping for a moment all my cares,
shall I, with pensive, silent, step explore
The woods yet leafless ; where to chilling airs .
Your green and penciled blossoms, trembling, wave.
Ah! ye soft, transient, children of the ground,
More fair was she on whose untimely grave ; .
Flow my unceasing tears! Their varied round
The seasons go ; while I through all repine :
For fixt regret, and hopeless grief are mine.


sONNET LXXIX.
TO THE GODDEss OF BOTANY.

OF Folly weary, shrinking from the view
Of Violence and Fraud, allowed to take
All peace from humble life ; I would forsake
Their haunts for ever, and, sweet Nymph! with you
Find shelter; where my tired, and tear-swoln eyes
Among your filent shades of soothing hue,
Your « bells and florets of unnumbered dyes”
Might rest—And learn the bright varieties
That from your lovely hands are fed with dew;
And every veined leaf, that trembling sighs
In mead or woodland ; or in wilds remote,
Or lurk with mosses in the humid caves,
Mantle the cliffs, on dimpling rivers float :
Or stream from coral rocks beneath the Ocean's waves.

sONNET LXXX.
TO THE INVIsIBLE MOON.

DARK and concealed art thou, soft Evening's Queen,
And Melancholy's votaries that delight
To watch thee, gliding thro' the blue serene,
Now vainly seek thee on the brow of night-
Mild sorrow, such as Hope has not forsook,
May love to muse beneath thy silent reign ;
But I prefer from some steep rock to look
On the obscure and fluctuating main,
What time the martial star with lurid glare,
Portentous, gleams above the troubled deep;
Or the red comet shakes his blazing hair ;
Or on the fire-tinged waves the lightnings leap ;
While thy fair beams illume another sky,
And shine for beings less accurst than I.


sonnet LXXXI

He may be envied, who with tranquil breast
Can wander in the wild and woodland scene,
When summer's glowing hands have newly drest
The shadowy forests, and the copses green ;
Who, unpursued by care, can pass his hours,
Where briony and woodbine fringe the trees,
On thymy banks reposing, while the bees
Murmur “ their fairy tunes in praise of flowers ;"
Or on the rock with ivy clad, and fern
That overhangs the ozier-whispering bed
Of some clear current, bid his wishes turn
From this bad world; and by calm reason led,
Knows, in refined retirement, to possess
By friendship hallowed-rural happiness!

sONNET LXXXII.
TO THE sHADE OF BURNs

MUTE is thy wild harp, now, O Bard sublime !
Who, amid scotia’s mountain folitude,
Great Nature taught to “ build the lofty rhyme,”
And even beneath the daily pressure, rude,
Of labouring Poverty, thy generous blood,
Fired with the love of freedom-Not subdued
Wert thou by thy low fortune : But a time
Like this we live in, when the abject chime
Of echoing Parasite is best approved,
Was not for thee-Indignantly is fled
Thy noble spirit ; and no longer moved
By all the ills over which thine heart has bled,
Associate, worthy of the illustrious dead,
Enjoy's with them “ the Liberty it loved.”

sONNET LXXXIII.
THE sEA VIEW

THE upland shepherd, as reclined he lies
On the soft turf that clothes the mountain brow,
Marks the bright sea-line mingling with the skies ;
Or from his course celestial, sinking slow,
The summer-sun in purple radiance low,
Blaze on the western waters; the wide scene
Magnificent, and tranquil, seems to spread
Even over the Rustic's breast a joy serene,
When, like dark plague-spots by the Demons shed,
Charged deep with death, upon the waves, far seen,
Move the war-freighted ships; and fierce and red,
Flash their destructive fires—The mangled dead .
And dying victims then pollute the flood.
Ah! thus man spoils Heaven's glorious works with blood!

sONNET LXXXIV.
TO THE MUsE.

Wilt thou forsake me who in life's bright May
Lent warmer lustre to the radiant morn ;
And even over summer scenes by tempests torn,
shed with illusive light the dewy ray
Of pensive pleasure ?-Wilt thou, while the day
Of faddening Autumn closes, as I mourn
In languid, hopeless sorrow, far away
Bend thy soft step, and never more return ?-
Crushed to the earth, by bitterest anguish prest,
From my faint eyes thy graceful form recedes ;
Thou canst not heal an heart like mine that bleeds ;
But, when in quiet earth that heart shall rest,
Haply may'st thou one sorrowing vigil keep,
Where Pity and Remembrance bend and weep!

THE DEAD BEGGAR.

sWELLs then thy feeling heart, and streams thine eye
over the deserted being, poor and old,
Whom cold, reluctant, Parish Charity
Consigns to mingle with his kindred mold?
Mourn'st thou, that here the time-worn sufferer ends
Those evil days still threatening woes to come ;
Here, where the friendless feel no want of friends,
Where even the houseless wanderer finds an home!

What tho' no kindred croud in fable forth,
And figh, or seem to figh, around his bier ;
Tho'over his coffin with the humid earth
No children drop the unavailing tear?
Rather rejoice that here his sorrows cease,
Whom sickness, age, and poverty oppress’d;
Where Death, the Leveller, restores to peace
The wretch who living knew not where to rest.
Rejoice, that tho' an outcast spurned by Fate,
Thro' penury's rugged path his race he ran ;
In earth's cold bosom, equalled with the great,
Death vindicates the insulted rights of Man.

Rejoice, that tho' severe his earthly doom,
And rude, and fown with thorns the way he trod,
Now, (where unfeeling Fortune cannot come)
He rests upon the mercies of his God..,

THE FEMALE EXILE.

November's chill blast on the rough beach is howling,
The surge breaks afar, and then foams to the shore,
Dark clouds over the sea gather heavy and scowling,
And the white cliffs re-echo the wild wintry roar.
Beneath that chalk rock, a fair stranger reelining,
Has found on damp sea-weed a cold lonely feat ;
Her eyes filled with tears, and her heart with repining,
she starts at the billows that burst at her feet.

There, day after day, with an anxious heart heaving,
she watches the waves where they mingle with air ;
For the fail which, alas! all her fond hopes deceiving,
May bring only tidings to add to her care.
Loose stream to wild winds those fair flowing tresses,
Once woven with garlands of gay summer flowers ;
Her dress unregarded, bespeaks her distresses,
And beauty is blighted by grief's heavy hours.
Her innocent children, unconscious of sorrow,
To seek the glossed shell, or the crimson weed stray;
Amused with the present, they heed not to-morrow,
Nor think of the storm that is gathering to day.

The gilt, fairy ship, with its ribbon-fail spreading !
They launch on the falt pool the tide left behind;
Ah! việtims--for whom their fad mother is dreading?
The multiplied miseries that wait on mankind! ..
To fair fortune born, she beholds them with anguish,
Now wanderers with her on a once hostile foil,
Perhaps doomed for life in chill penury to languish,
Or abject dependence, or soul-crushing toil.
But the sea-boat, her hopes and her terrors renewing,
over the dim grey horizon now faintly appears;
she flies to the quay, dreading tidings of ruin,
All breathless with hafte, half expiring with fears.

Poor mourner !I would that my fortune had left me
The means to alleviate the woes I deplore;
.
But like thine my hard fate has of affluence bereft me,
I can warm the cold heart of the wretched no more!

OCCAsIONAL ADDREss,
WRITTEN FOR THE BENEFIT OF A DIsTREssED
PLAYER, DETAINED AT BRIGHTHELMsTONE
FOR DEBT, NOVEMBER 1792.

WHEN in a thousand swarms, the summer over,
The birds of passage quit our English shore,
By various routs the feathered myriad moves ;
The Becca-Fica seeks Italian groves,
No more a Wheat-ear; while the soaring files
Of fea-fowl gather round the Hebrid-isles.
But if by bird-lime touched, unplumed, confined,
some poor ill-fated 'straggler stays behind,
Driven from his transient perch, beneath your eaves
On his unsheltered head the tempest raves,
While drooping round, redoubling every pain,
His Mate and Nestlings ask his help in vain.

so we, the buskin and the sock who wear,
And“ strut and fret,” our little season here,
Dismissed at length, as Fortune bids divide
some (lucky rogues !) fit down on Thames's side ;
Others to Liffy's western banks proceed,
And some-driven far a-field, across the Tweed:

But, pinioned here, alas ! I cannot fly :
The hapless, unplumed, lingering straggler I !
Unless the healing pity you bestow,
shall imp my shattered wings—and let me go.
Hard is his fate, whom evil stars have led
To seek in scenic art precarious bread,
While still, thro’ wild vicissitudes afloat,
An Hero now, and now a sans Culotte !
That eleemosinary bread he gains
Mingling with real distresses--mimic pains.

see in our group, a pale, lank Falstaff stare!
Much needs he stuffing : --while young Ammon there
Rehearses--in a garret-ten feet square !
And as his soft statira sighs consent,
Roxana comes not-but a dun for rent !
Here shiv’ring Edgar, in his blanket rollid,
Exclaims--with too much reason, “ Tom's a-cold ” !
And vainly tries his sorrows to divert,
While Goneril or Regan-wash his shirt !
-a mutt
Lo! fresh from Calais, Edward ! mighty king!
Revolves—a mutľon chop upon a string!
And Hotspur, plucking “ honour from the moon,” :
Feeds a fick infant with a pewter spoon !
More bleft the Fisher, who undaunted braves
In his small bark, the impetuous winds and waves;

For though he plough the sea when others sleep,
He draws, like Glendower, spirits from the deep !
And while the storm howls round, amidst his trouble,
Bright moonshine still illuminates the cobble !
Pale with her fears for him, some fair Poissarde,
Watches his nearing boat ; with fond regard
smiles when she sees his little canvass handing,
And clasps her dripping lover on his landing.
More blest the Peasant, who, with nervous toil
Hews the rough oak, or breaks the stubborn foil :
Weary, indeed, he sees the evening come,
But then, the rude, yet tranquil hut, his home,
Receives its rustic inmate; then are his,
secure repose, and dear domestic bliss!
The orchard's blushing fruit, the garden's store,
The pendant hop, that mantles round the door,

Are his :-and while the cheerful faggots burn,
“ His lisping children hail their fire's return !"
But wandering Players, “ unhoufeld, unannealed,"
And unappointed, scour life's common field,
A flying squadron !-disappointments cross 'em,
And the campaign concludes, perhaps, at Horsham!
Oh! ye, whose timely bounty deigns to shed
Compassion's balm upon my luckless head,
Benevolence, with warm and glowing breast,
And soft, celestial mercy, doubly blest !
smile on the generous a&t!—where means are given,
To aid the wretchedis to merit Heaven.


INsCRIPTION.

WHATEVER of praise, and of regret attend
The grateful servant, and the humble friend,
Where strict integrity and worth unite
To raise the lowly in their Maker's fight,
Are her's; whose faithful service, long approved,
Wept by the Mistress whom thro' life she loved.
Here ends her earthly task; in joyful trust
To share the eternal triumph of the Just.. .

A DEsCRIPTIVE ODE.

CHAOTIC pile of barren stone,
That Nature's hurrying hand has thrown,
Half finished, from the troubled waves;
On whose rude brow the rifted tower
Haş frowned, thro' many a stormy hour,
On this drear site of tempest-beaten graves,

sure Desolation loves to shroud
His giant form within the cloud
That hovers round thy rugged head ;
And as thro’ broken vaults beneath, 
The future storms low-muttering breathe,
Hears the complaining voices of the dead.

Here marks the Fiend with eager eyes,
Far out at sea the fogs arise
That dimly shade the beaconed strand,
And listens the portentous roár
Of sullen waves, as on the shore,
Monotonous, they burst and tell the storm at hand..

Northward the Demon's eyes are caft. ' '
over yonder bare and sterile waste, 
Where, born to hew and heave the block, sinj
Man, loft in ignorance and toil,
Becomes associate to the soil,.. .. .. .
And his heart hardens like his native rock.

On the bleak hills, with flint overspread,
No blossoms rear the purple head;...
No shrub perfumes the Zephyrs' breath,
But over the cold and cheerless down.


Grim Desolation seems to frown,'
 Blasting the ungrateful soil with partial death

Here the scathed trees with leaves half-drest,
shade no soft songster's secret nest,
Whose spring-notes soothe the penfive ear ;
But high the croaking cormorant flies,
And mews and hawks with clamorous cries
Tire the lone echos of these caverns drear;
Perchance among the ruins grey
some widowed mourner loves to stray,
Marking the melancholy main
Where once, afar she could discern
over the white waves his fail return
Who never, never now, returns again!

On these lone tombs, by storms up-torn, 
The hopeless wretch may lingering'móurn, . .
Till from the ocean, rising red,
The misty Moon with lurid ray'
Lights her, reluctant, on her way,
To steep in tears her solitary bed,

Hence the dire spirit oft furveys
The ship, that to the western bays
With favouring gales pursues its course ; '.'
Then calls the vapour dark that blinds
The pilot-calls the felon winds!
That heave the billows with resifless force.

Commixing with the blotted skies,
High and more high the wild waves rise,
Till, as impetuous torrents urge,
Driven on yon fatal bank accurst,
The vessel's massy timbers burst,
And the crew sinks beneath the infuriate surge.
There find the weak an early grave,
While youthful strength the whelming wave
Repels; and labouring for the land,
With shortened breath and upturned eyes,
sees the rough shore above him rise,
Nor dreams that rapine meets him on the strand.

And are there then in human form
Monsters more favage than the storm,
Who from the gasping sufferer tear
The dripping weed ?—who dare to reap
The inhuman harvest of the deep,
From half-drowned vi&tims whom the tempests spare ?
Ah! yes ! by avarice once poffeft, .
No pity moves the rustic breast;
Callous he proves—as those who haply wait
Till I (a pilgrim weary worn)
To my own native land return,
With legal toils to drag me to my fate !

VERsEs.

As in the woods, where leathery Lichen weaves
Its wint'ry web among the sallow leaves,
Which (thro' cold months in whirling eddies blown)
Decay beneath the branches once their own,
From the brown shelter of their foliage sear,
spring the young blooms that lead the floral year :
When, waked by vernal suns, the Pilewort dares
Fxpand her spotted leaves, and shining stars
.
And (veins empurpling all her tassels pale)
Bends the soft Wind-flower in the tepid gale ;
Uncultured bells of azure Jacynth's blow,
And the breeze-fcenting Violet lurks below :

so views the wanderer, with delighted eyes,
Reviving hopes from black despondence rise,
When, blighted by Adversity's chill breath,
Those hopes had felt a temporary death; ".
Then with gay heart he looks to future hours," :
When Love shall dress for him the summer bowers! ;
And, as delicious dreams enchant his mind,
Forgets his sorrows past, or gives them to the wind

sONG,

“Ah! say,” the fair Louisa cried;
say where the abode of Love is found ?”
Pervading Nature, I replied,
His influence spreads the world around.
When Morning's arrowy beams arise,
He sparkles in the enlivening ray,
And blushes in the glowing skies
When rosy Evening fades away.
The summer winds that gently blow,
The flocks that bleat along the glades,
The nightingale, that soft and low,
With music fills the listening shades :

The murmurs of the silver surf
All echo Love's enchanting notes,
From Violets lurking in the turf,
His balmy breath thro' æther floats.

From perfumed flowers and dewy leaves
Delicious scents he bids exhale,
He smiles amid Autumnal sheaves,
And clothes with green the grassy vale;
But when that throne the God assumes
Where his most powerful influence lies,
'Tis on Louisas cheek hé blooms,
And lightens from her radiant eyes!


APOsTROPHE.

WHERE thy broad branches brave the bitter North,
Like rugged, indigent, unheeded, worth,
Lo! Vegetation's guardian hands emboss
Each giant limb with fronds of studded moss,
That clothes the bark in many, a fringed fold
Begemmed with scarlet shields, and cups of gold,
Which, to the wildest winds their webbs oppose,
And mock the arrowy sleet, or weltering snows.
-But to the warmer Weft the Woodbine fair

With tassels that perfumed the summer air,
The mantling Clematis, whose feathery bowers
Waved in feftoons with Nightshade's purple flowers,
The silver weed, whose corded fillets wove
Round thy pale rind, even as deceitful love
Of mercenary beauty would engage
The dotard fondness of decrepit age ;
All these, that during summer's halcyon days
With their green canopies concealed thy sprays,
Are gone for ever; or disfigured, trail
Their fallow relicts in the Autumnal gale;
Or over thy roots, in faded fragments tost,
But tell of happier hours, and sweetness lost!
-Thus in Fate's trying hour, when furious storms
strip social life of Pleasure's fragile forms,


And aweful Justice, as his rightful prey
Tears Luxury's filk, and jeweld robe, away,
While reads Adversity her lesson stern,
And Fortune's minions tremble as they learn ;
The crouds around her gilded car that hung,
Bent the lithe knee, and trould the honeyed tongue,
Desponding fall, or fly in pale despair ;
And scorn alone remembers that they were.
Not so Integrity; unchanged he lives
In the rude armour conscious Honor gives,
And dares with hardy front the troubled sky,
In Honesty's uninjured panoply.
Ne’er on Prosperity's enfeebling bed
Or rosy pillows, he reposed his head,

But given to useful arts, his ardent mind
Has sought the general welfare of mankind ;
To mitigate their ills his greatest bliss,
While studying them, has taught him what he is ;
He, when the human tempest rages worst,
And the earth shudders as the thunders burst,
Firm, as thy northern branch, is rooted fast,
And if he can't avert, endures the blast.

THE FOREsT BOY.

THE trees have now hid at the edge of the hurst
The spot where the ruins decay
Of the cottage, where Will of the Woodland was nursed
And lived so beloved, till the moment accurft
When he went from the woodland away.
Among all the lads of the plough or the fold,
Best esteemed by the sober and good,
Was Will of the Woodlands ; and often the old
Would tell of his frolics, for active and bold
Was William the Boy of the wood.
Yet gentle was he, as the breath of the May,
And when fick and declining was laid
The Woodman his father, young William away
Would go to the forest to labour all day, - '.
And perform his hard task in his stead.
And when his poor father the forester died,
And his mother was sad, and alone,
He toiled from the dawn, and at evening he hied
In storm or in snow, or whate'er might betide,
To supply all her wants from the town.

One neighbour they had on the heath to the west,
And no other the cottage was near,
But she would send Phæbe, the child she loved best,
To stay with the widow, thus fad and diftrest,
Her hours of dejection to cheer.
As the buds of wild roses, the cheeks of the maid
Were just tinted with youth's lovely hue,
Her form like the aspen, wild graces displayed,
And the eyes, over which her luxuriant locks strayed,
As the skies of the summer were blue !

still labouring to live, yet reflecting the while, ;.
Young William considered his lot; ' ' '
'Twas hard, yet-'twas honest ; and one tender smile
From Phoebe at night overpaid ev'ry toil,
And then all his fatigues were forgot.
--
By the brook where it glides thro' the copfe of Arbeal, :
When to eat his cold fare he reclined,
Then soft from her home his fweet Phoebe would steal
And bring him wood-strawberries to finish his meal,
And would fit by his fide while he dined.

And tho' when employed in the deep forest glade, :
His days have seemed slowly to move,
Yet Phæbe going home, thro’ the wood-walk has strayed
To bid him good night !-and whatever she said :
Was more sweet than the voice of the dove.
Fair Hope, that the lover so fondly believes,
Then repeated each soul-soothing speech,
And touched with illusion, that often deceives
The future with light ; as the sun thro' the leaves
Illumines the boughs of the beech.

.
But once more the tempests of chill Winter blow,
To depress and disfigure the earth';' ;'
And now ere the dawn, the young Woodman must go
To his work in the forest, half buried in snow, .
And at night bring home wood for the hearth.
The bridge on the heath by the flood was washed down,
And fast fell the sleet and the rain,
The stream to a wild rapid river was grown,
And long might the widow sit fighing alone
Ere sweet Phoebe could see her again.

At the town was a market--and now for supplies
such as needed her humble abode,
Young William went forth; and his mother with sighs
Watched long at the window, with tears in her eyes,
Till he turned thro' the fields, to the road.
Then darkness came on ; and she heard with affright
The wind every moment more high;
she looked from the door; not a star lent its light,
But the tempest redoubled the gloom of the night,
And the rain poured in sheets from the sky.

The clock in her cottage now mournfully told
The hours that went heavily on; .
'Twas midnight ; her spirits funk hopeless and cold,
And it seemed as each blast of wind fearfully told
That long, long would her William be gone.
Then heart-fick and cold to her fad bed she crept,
Yet first made up the fire in the room
To guide his dark steps ; but she listened and wept,
Or if for a moment forgetful she slept,
soon she started !-and thought he was come.

'Twas morn; and the wind with an hoarse sullen moan
Now seemed dying away in the wood,
When the poor wretched mother still drooping, alone, *
Beheld on the threshold a figure unknown,
In gorgeous apparel who stood.
6 Your son is a soldier,” abruptly cried he,
“ And a place in our corps has obtain’d,
“ Nay, be not cast down ; you perhaps may soon see
66 Your William a captain! he now sends by me
“ The purse he already has gained.”

so William entrapped 'twixt persuasion and force,
Is embarked for the isles of the West,
But he seemed to begin with ill omens his course,
And felt recollection, regret, and remorse
Continually weigh on his breast.
With useless repentance he eagerly eyed
The high coast as it faded from view,
And saw the green hills, on whose northernmost side
Was his own fylvan home: and he faltered and cried
“ Adieu ! ah ! for ever adieu ! . . . .

 Who now, my poor mother, thy life shall sustain,
 since thy fon has thus left thee forlorn ?
Ah! can'st thou forgive me? And not in the pain
Of this cruel desertion, of William complain,
“ And lament that he ever was born ?
“ sweet Phoebe !—if ever thy lover was dear,
“ Now forsake not the cottage of woe,
" But comfort my mother; and quiet her fear,
“ And help her to dry up the vain fruitless tear
« That too long for my absence will flow.

Yet what if my Phæbe another should wed,
 And lament her loft William no more ?"
The thought was too cruel ; and anguish now sped
The dart of disease-
With the brave numerous dead
He has fall’n on the plague-tainted shore.
In the lone village church-yard, the chancel-wall near,
High grass now waves over the spot,
Where the mother of William, unable to bear
His loss, who to her widowed heart was so dear,
Has both him and her sorrows forgot.

By the brook where it winds thro' the wood of Arbeal,
Or amid the deep forest, to moan, .
The poor wandering Phæbe will silently steal ;
The pain of her bosom no reason can heal,
And she loves to indulge it alone.

Her senses are injured; her eyes dim with tears ;
she sits by the river and weaves
Reed garlands, against her dear William appears,
Then breathlessly listens, and fancies she hears
His step in the half-withered leaves.

Ah! such are the miseries to which ye give birth,
Ye statesmen! ne'er dreading a scar;
Who from pictured saloon, or the bright sculptured hearth
Disperse desolation and death thro' the earth,
When ye let loose the demons of war.

ODE TO THE POPPY.

Not for the promise of the laboured field,
Not for the good the yellow harvests yield,
I bend at Ceres’ shrine; ,
For dull, to humid eyes, appear
The golden glories of the year,
Alas !-a melancholy worship’s mine.

I hail the goddess for her scarlet flower!
Thou brilliant weed,
That dost so far exceed
The richest gifts gay Flora can bestow :
Heedless I passed thee, in life's morning hour,
(Thou comforter of woe)
Till forrow taught me to confess thy power.
In early days, when Fancy cheats,
A varied wreath I wove
Of laughing spring's luxuriant sweets,
To deck ungrateful Love:
The rose, or thorn, my labours crowned,
As Venus smiled, or Venus frowned;'

But Love, and Joy, and all their train, are flown; ..
E’en languid Hope no more is mine,
And I will sing of thee alone,
Unless, perchance, the attributes of Grief,
The cypress bud, and willow leaf,
Their pale funereal foliage blend with thine.
Hail, lovely blossom !-thou can'st ease
The wretched victims of Disease ;
Can'st close those weary eyes in gentle sleep,
Which never open but to weep;
For, oh! thy potent charm
Can agonizing Pain disarm ;
Expel imperious Memory from her seat,
And bid the throbbing heart forget to beat.

soul-soothing plant ! that can such blessings give,
By thee the mourner bears to live!
By thee the hopeless die !
Oh! ever “ friendly to despair,”
Might sorrow's pallid votary dare,
Without a crime, that remedy implore,
Which bids the spirit from its bondage fly,
Ied court thy palliative aid no more ;
No more Ied sue that thou should'st spread,
Thy spell around my aching head,
But would conjure thee to impart
Thy balsam for a broken heart ;
And by thy soft Lethean power,
(Inestimable flower)
Burst these terrestrial bonds, and other regions try.

VERsEs.
WRITTEN BY THE sAME LADY ON sEEING HER
TWO sONs AT PLAY.

sWEET age of blest delusion! blooming boys,
Ah! revel long in childhood's thoughtless joys,
With light and pliant fpirits, that can stoop
To follow, sportively, the rolling hoop;
To watch the sleeping top with gay delight,
Or mark, with raptured gaze, the failing kite ;
Or, eagerly pursuing Pleasure's call,
Can find it centered in the bounding ball !
Alas! the day will come, when sports like these
Must lose their magic, and their power to please ;
Too swiftly fled, the rosy hours of youth
shall yield their fairy-charms to mournful Truth ;


VERsEs.

Even now, a mother's fond prophetic fear
sees the dark train of human ills appear ;
Views various fortune for each lovely child,
storms for the bold, and anguish for the mild ;
Beholds already those expressive eyes
Beam a sad certainty of future fighs ;
And dreads each suffering those dear breasts may know
In their long passage through a world of woe ;
Perchance predestined every pang to prove,
That treacherous friends inflict, or faithless love ;
For, ah! how few have found existence sweet,
Where grief is sure, but happiness deceit !

VERsEs
ON THE DEATH OF THE sAME LADY, WRITTEN
IN sEPTEMBER 1794.

LIKE a poor ghost the night I seek ;
Its hollow winds repeat my sighs;
The cold dews mingle on my cheek
With tears that wander' from mine eyes.
The thorns that still my couch molest,
Have robbed these heavy eyes of sleep ;
But tho' deprived of tranquil rest,
I here at least am free to weep.

Twelve times the moon, that rises red
over yon tall wood of shadowy pine,
Has filled her orb, fince low was laid
My Harriet ! that sweet form of thine!
:
While each sad month, as slow it past,
Brought some new sorrow to deplore ;
some grief more poignant than the last,
But thou can'st calm those griefs no more..
?
No more thy friendship fooths to rest
oths to relti
This wearied spirit tempest-tost;
· The cares that weigh upon my breast
Are doubly felt since thou art loft.

Bright visions of ideal grace
That the young poet's dreams inflame,
Were not more lovely than thy face ;
Were not more perfeet than thy frame.
Wit, that no sufferings could impair,
Was thine, and thine those mental powers
Of force to chase the fiends that tear
From Fancy's hands her budding flowers.
over what, my angel friend, thou wert,
Dejected Memory loves to mourn;
Regretting still that tender heart,
Now withering in a distant urn!

But ere that wood of shadowy pine
Twelve times shall yon full orb behold,
This fickening heart, that bleeds for thine,
My Harriet !-may like thine be cold !

FRAGMENT,
DEsCRIPTIVE OF THE MIsERIEs OF WAR; FROM
A POEM CALLED “The EMIGRANTs,"
PRINTED 

a wild mountain, whose bare summit hides
Its broken eminence in clouds; whose steeps
Are dark with woods; where the receding rocks
Are worn with torrents of diffolving snow;
A wretched woman, pale and breathless, flies,
And, gazing round her, listens to the sound
Of hostile footsteps :-No! they die away-
Nor noise remains, but of the cataract,
Or surly breeze of night, that mutters low
Among the thickets, where she trembling seeks
A temporary shelter-Clasping close
To her quick throbbing heart her sleeping child,

All she could rescue of the innocent group
That yesterday surrounded her-Escaped
Almost by miracle !Fear, frantic Fear,
Winged her weak feet; yet, half repenting now
Her headlong haste, she wishes she had staid
To die with those affrighted Fancy paints
The lawless soldiers' victims---Hark! again
The driving tempest bears the cry of Death ;
And with deep, sudden thunder, the dread found ,
Of cannon vibrates on the tremulous earth;
While, bursting in the air, the murderous bomb
Glares over her mansion-Where the splinters fall
Like scattered comets, its destructive path
Is marked by wreaths of flame !~Then, overwhelm’d,

Beneath accumulated horror, finks
The desolate mourner !
The feudal Chief, whose Gothic battlements
Frown on the plain beneath, returning home
From distant lands, alone, and in disguise,
Gains at the fall of night his castle walls,
But, at the filent gate no porter fits
To wait his lord's admittance !-In the courts
All is drear stillness !–Guessing but too well
The fatal truth, he shudders as he goes
Thro' the mute hall; where, by the blunted light

That the dim Moon thro' painted casement lends,
He sees that devastation has been there ;
Then, while each hideous image to his mind
Rises terrific, over a bleeding corse :
stumbling he falls; another intercepts
His staggering feet-All, all who used to rush
With joy to meet him, all his family
Lie murdered in his way ! And the day dawns
On a wild raving Maniac, whom a fate
so sudden and calamitous has robb’d
Of reason ; and who round his vacant walls
screams unregarded, and reproaches Heaven!

APRIL.

GREEN over the copses spring's soft hues are
spreading,
High wave the Reeds in the transparent floods,
The Oak its fear and fallow foliage shedding,
From their mossed cradles start its infant buds.
Pale as the tranquil tide of summer's ocean,
The Willow now its slender leaf unveils ;
And thro' the sky with swiftly fleeting motion,
Driv'n by the wind, the rack of April fails.

Then, as the gust declines, the stealing showers
Fall fresh and noiseless; while at closing day
The low sun gleams on moist and half-blown flowers
That promise garlands for approaching May.
Blest are yon peasant children, simply singing,
Who thro’ the new-sprung grass rejoicing rove;
More blest! to whom the Time, fond thought is bringing,
Of friends expected, or returning love.
The pensive wanderer blest, to whom reflection
Points out some future views that sooth his mind;
Me how unlike!-whom cruel recollection
But tells of comfort I shall never find!

Hope, that on Nature's youth is still attending,
No more to me her fyren song shall sing ;
Never to me her influence extending,
shall I again enjoy the days of spring !
Yet, how I loved them once these scenes remind me,
When light of heart, in childhood's thoughtless mirth,
I recked not that the cruel lot assigned me
should make me curse the hour that gave me birth !
Then, from thy wild-wood banks, Aruna! roving,
Thy thymy downs with sportive steps I fought,
And Nature's charms, with artless transport loving,
sung like the birds, unheeded and untaught.

But now the springtide's pleasant hours returning,
serve to awaken me to sharper pain ;
Recalling scenes of agony and mourning,
Of baffled hope and prayers preferred in vain.
Thus shone the sun, his vernal rays displaying,
Thus did the woods in early verdure wave,
While dire Disease on all I loved was preying,
And flowers seemed rising but to strew her grave!
Now, 'mid reviving blooms, I coldly languish,
spring seems devoid of joy to me alone ;
Each sound of pleasure aggravates my anguish,
And speaks of beauty, youth, and sweetness gone !

Yet, as stern Duty bids, with faint endeavour
I drag on life, contending with my woe,
Tho' conscious Misery still repeats, that never
My soul one pleasureable hour shall know.
Lost in the tomb, when Hope no more appeases
The festered wounds that prompt the eternal sigh,
Grief, the most fatal of the heart's diseases,
soon teaches, whom it fastens on, to die.
The wretch undone, for pain alone existing,
The abject dread of Death shall sure subdue,
And far from his decisive hand resisting,
Rejoice to bid a world like this, adieu !

ODE TO DEATH.

FRIEND of the wretched! wherefore should the eye
Of blank Despair, whence tears have ceased to flow,
Be turned from thee?-Ah! wherefore fears to die
He, who compellid each poignant grief to know,
Drains to its lowest dregs the cup of woe ?
Would Cowardice postpone thy calm embrace,
To linger out long years in torturing pain ?
Or not prefer thee to the ills that chase
Him, who too much impoverished to obtain
From British Themis right, implores her aid in
vain !

sharp goading Indigence who would not fly,
That urges toil the exhausted strength above ?
Or shun the once fond friend's averted eye ?
Or who to thy afylum not remove,
To lose the wasting anguish of ungrateful love ?
Can then the wounded wretch who must deplore .
What most she lov’d, to thy cold arms consign’d,
Who hears the voice that soothed her soul no more,
Fear thee, O Death !-Or hug the chains that bind
To joyless, cheerless life, her fick, reluctant mind?

Oh! Misery's Cure; who e'er in pale dismay
Has watched the angel form they could not fave,
And seen their dearest blessing torn away,
May well the terrors of thy triumph brave,
Nor pause in fearful dread before the opening grave !
