Portentous change when History can appear
    As the cool Advocate of foul device;
    Reckless audacity extol, and jeer
    At consciences perplexed with scruples nice!
    They who bewail not, must abhor, the sneer                        
    Born of Conceit, Power blind Idolater;
    Or haply sprung from vaunting Cowardice
    Betrayed by mockery of holy fear.
    Hath it not long been said the wrath of Man
    Works not the righteousness of God? Oh bend,                      
    Bend, ye Perverse! to judgments from on High,
    Laws that lay under Heaven perpetual ban
    All principles of action that transcend
    The sacred limits of humanity.


    Who ponders National events shall find
    An awful balancing of loss and gain,
    Joy based on sorrow, good with ill combined,
    And proud deliverance issuing out of pain
    And direful throes; as if the All-ruling Mind,                     
    With whose perfection it consists to ordain
    Volcanic burst, earthquake, and hurricane,
    Dealt in like sort with feeble human kind
    By laws immutable. But woe for him
    Who thus deceived shall lend an eager hand                        
    To social havoc. Is not Conscience ours,
    And Truth, whose eye guilt only can make dim;
    And Will, whose office, by divine command,
    Is to control and check disordered Powers?

    Long-favoured England! be not thou misled
    By monstrous theories of alien growth,
    Lest alien frenzy seize thee, waxing wroth,
    Self-smitten till thy garments reek dyed red
    With thy own blood, which tears in torrents shed                   
    Fail to wash out, tears flowing ere thy troth
    Be plighted, not to ease but sullen sloth,
    Or wan despair--the ghost of false hope fled
    Into a shameful grave. Among thy youth,
    My Country! if such warning be held dear,                         
    Then shall a Veteran heart be thrilled with joy,
    One who would gather from eternal truth,
    For time and season, rules that work to cheer--
    Not scourge, to save the People--not destroy.