  Fair Lady! can I sing of flowers
      That in Madeira bloom and fade,
    I who never sate within their bowers,
      Nor through their sunny lawns have strayed?
    How they in sprightly dance are worn                               
      By Shepherd-groom or May-day queen,
    Or holy festal pomps adorn,
      These eyes have never seen.

    Yet tho to me the pencil’s art
      No like remembrances can give,                                  
    Your portraits still may reach the heart
      And there for gentle pleasure live;
    While Fancy ranging with free scope
      Shall on some lovely Alien set
    A name with us endeared to hope,                                  
      To peace, or fond regret.

    Still as we look with nicer care,
      Some new resemblance we may trace:
    A Heart ease will perhaps be there,
      A _Speedwell_ may not want its place.                           
    And so may we, with charmèd mind
      Beholding what your skill has wrought,
    Another _Star-of-Bethlehem_ find,
      A new Forget-me-not.

    From earth to heaven with motion fleet                            
      From heaven to earth our thoughts will pass,
    A _Holy-thistle_ here we meet
      And there a _Shepherd weather-glass_;
    And haply some familiar name
      Shall grace the fairest, sweetest, plant                        
    Whose presence cheers the drooping frame
      Of English Emigrant.

    Gazing she feels its power beguile
      Sad thoughts, and breathes with easier breath;
    Alas! that meek that tender smile                                 
      Is but a harbinger of death:
    And pointing with a feeble hand
      She says, in faint words by sighs broken,
    Bear for me to my native land
      This precious Flower, true love’s last token.                   

      And there in sweet communion live:
    Yet those loved most, in which we own
      A touching likeness which they bear
    To flower or herb, by Nature sown,
      To breathe our English air.
