 Ah why deceive ourselves! by no mere fit
    Of sudden passion roused shall men attain
    True freedom where for ages they have lain
    Bound in a dark abominable pit,
    With life best sinews more and more unknit.                      
    Here, there, a banded few who loathe the chain
    May rise to break it: effort worse than vain
    For thee, O great Italian nation, split
    Into those jarring fractions Let thy scope
    Be one fixed mind for all; thy rights approve                     
    To thy own conscience gradually renewed;
    Learn to make Time the father of wise Hope;
    Then trust thy cause to the arm of Fortitude,
    The light of Knowledge, and the warmth of Love.

    Hard task! exclaim the undisciplined, to lean
    On Patience coupled with such slow endeavour,
    That long-lived servitude must last for ever.
    Perish the grovelling few, who, prest between
    Wrongs and the terror of redress, would wean                       
    Millions from glorious aims. Our chains to sever
    Let us break forth in tempest now or never!--
    What, is there then no space for golden mean
    And gradual progress Twilight leads to day,
    And, even within the burning zones of earth,                      
    The hastiest sunrise yields a temperate ray;
    The softest breeze to fairest flowers gives birth:
    Think not that Prudence dwells in dark abodes,
    She scans the future with the eye of gods.

    As leaves are to the tree whereon they grow
    And wither, every human generation
    Is to the Being of a mighty nation,
    Locked in our world embrace through weal and woe;
    Thought that should teach the zealot to forego                     
    Rash schemes, to abjure all selfish agitation,
    And seek through noiseless pains and moderation
    The unblemished good they only can bestow.
    Alas! with most, who weigh futurity
    Against time present, passion holds the scales:                   
    Hence equal ignorance of both prevails,
    And nations sink; or, struggling to be free,
    Are doomed to flounder on, like wounded whales
    Tossed on the bosom of a stormy sea.
