 Now that the farewell tear is dried,
    Heaven prosper thee, be hope thy guide!
    Hope be thy guide, adventurous Boy;
    The wages of thy travel, joy!
    Whether for London bound--to trill                             
    Thy mountain notes with simple skill;
    Or on thy head to poise a show
    Of Images in seemly row;
    The graceful form of milk-white Steed,
    Or Bird that soared with Ganymede;
    Or through our hamlets thou wilt bear
    The sightless Milton, with his hair
    Around his placid temples curled;
    And Shakspeare at his side--a freight,
    If clay could think and mind were weight,                     
    For him who bore the world!
    Hope be thy guide, adventurous Boy;
    The wages of thy travel, joy!

    But thou, perhaps, (alert as free
    Though serving sage philosophy)                               
    Wilt ramble over hill and dale,
    A Vender of the well-wrought Scale,
    Whose sentient tube instructs to time
    A purpose to a fickle clime:
    Whether thou choose this useful part,                         
    Or minister to finer art,
    Though robbed of many a cherished dream,
    And crossed by many a shattered scheme,
    What stirring wonders wilt thou see
    In the proud Isle of liberty!                                 
    Yet will the Wanderer sometimes pine
    With thoughts which no delights can chase,
    Recal a Sister's last embrace,
    His Mother's neck entwine;
    Nor shall forget the Maiden coy                               
    That _would_ have loved the bright-haired Boy!

    My Song, encouraged by the grace
    That beams from his ingenuous face,
    For this Adventurer scruples not
    To prophesy a golden lot;                                     
    Due recompense, and safe return
    To COMO'S steeps--his happy bourne!
    Where he, aloft in garden glade,
    Shall tend, with his own dark-eyed Maid,
    The towering maize, and prop the twig                         
    That ill supports the luscious fig;
    Or feed his eye in paths sun-proof
    With purple of the trellis-roof,
    That through the jealous leaves escapes
    From Cadenabbia's pendent grapes.                             
    --Oh might he tempt that Goatherd-child
    To share his wanderings! him whose look
    Even yet my heart can scarcely brook,
    So touchingly he smiled--
    As with a rapture caught from heaven--                        
    For unasked alms in pity given


    With nodding plumes, and lightly drest
    Like foresters in leaf-green vest,
    The Helvetian Mountaineers, on ground
    For Tell's dread archery renowned,                            
    Before the target stood--to claim
    The guerdon of the steadiest aim.
    Loud was the rifle-gun's report--
    A startling thunder quick and short!
    But, flying through the heights around,                       
    Echo prolonged a tell-tale sound
    Of hearts and hands alike "prepared
    The treasures they enjoy to guard!"
    And, if there be a favoured hour
    When Heroes are allowed to quit                               
    The tomb, and on the clouds to sit
    With tutelary power,
    On their Descendants shedding grace--
    This was the hour, and that the place.

    But Truth inspired the Bards of old                           
    When of an iron age they told,
    Which to unequal laws gave birth,
    And drove Astræa from the earth.
    --A gentle Boy (perchance with blood
    As noble as the best endued,                                  
    But seemingly a Thing despised;
    Even by the sun and air unprized;
    For not a tinge or flowery streak
    Appeared upon his tender cheek)
    Heart-deaf to those rebounding notes,                         
    Apart, beside his silent goats,
    Sate watching in a forest shed,
    Pale, ragged, with bare feet and head;
    Mute as the snow upon the hill,
    And, as the saint he prays to, still.                         
    Ah, what avails heroic deed?
    What liberty? if no defence
    Be won for feeble Innocence.
    Father of all! though wilful Manhood read
    His punishment in soul-distress,                             
    Grant to the morn of life its natural blessedness!
