From Bolton's old monastic tower
    The bells ring loud with gladsome power;
    The sun shines bright; the fields are gay
    With people in their best array
    Of stole and doublet, hood and scarf,                        
    Along the banks of crystal Wharf,
    Through the Vale retired and lowly,
    Trooping to that summons holy.
    And, up among the moorlands, see
    What sprinklings of blithe company!                         
    Of lasses and of shepherd grooms,
    That down the steep hills force their way,
    Like cattle through the budded brooms;
    Path, or no path, what care they?
    And thus in joyous mood they hie                            
    To Bolton's mouldering Priory.

      What would they there!--full fifty years
    That sumptuous Pile, with all its peers,
    Too harshly hath been doomed to taste
    The bitterness of wrong and waste:                          
    Its courts are ravaged; but the tower
    Is standing with a voice of power,
    That ancient voice which wont to call
    To mass or some high festival;
    And in the shattered fabric's heart                         
    Remaineth one protected part;
    A Chapel, like a wild-bird's nest,
    Closely embowered and trimly drest;
    And thither young and old repair,
    This Sabbath-day, for praise and prayer.                    

      Fast the church-yard fills;--anon
    Look again, and they all are gone;
    The cluster round the porch, and the folk
    Who sate in the shade of the Prior's Oak!
    And scarcely have they disappeared                          
    Ere the prelusive hymn is heard:--
    With one consent the people rejoice,
    Filling the church with a lofty voice!
    They sing a service which they feel:
    For 'tis the sunrise now of zeal;                           
    Of a pure faith the vernal prime--
    In great Eliza's golden time

      A moment ends the fervent din,
    And all is hushed, without and within;
    For though the priest, more tranquilly,                     
    Recites the holy liturgy,
    The only voice which you can hear
    Is the river murmuring near.
    --When soft!--the dusky trees between,
    And down the path through the open green,                   
    Where is no living thing to be seen;
    And through yon gateway, where is found,
    Beneath the arch with ivy bound,
    Free entrance to the church-yard ground--
    Comes gliding in with lovely gleam,                      
    Comes gliding in serene and slow,
    Soft and silent as a dream,
    A solitary Doe!
    White she is as lily of June,
    And beauteous as the silver moon                            
    When out of sight the clouds are driven
    And she is left alone in heaven;
    Or like a ship some gentle day
    In sunshine sailing far away,
    A glittering ship, that hath the plain                      
    Of ocean for her own domain.

      Lie silent in your graves, ye dead!
    Lie quiet in your church-yard bed!
    Ye living, tend your holy cares;
    Ye multitude, pursue your prayers;                          
    And blame not me if my heart and sight
    Are occupied with one delight!
    'Tis a work for sabbath hours
    If I with this bright Creature go:
    Whether she be of forest bowers,                            
    From the bowers of earth below;
    Or a Spirit for one day given,
    A pledge of grace from purest heaven.

      What harmonious pensive changes
    Wait upon her as she ranges                                 
    Round and through this Pile of state
    Overthrown and desolate!
    Now a step or two her way
    Leads through space of open day,
    Where the enamoured sunny light                             
    Brightens her that was so bright;
    Now doth a delicate shadow fall,
    Falls upon her like a breath,
    From some lofty arch or wall,
    As she passes underneath:                                   
    Now some gloomy nook partakes
    Of the glory that she makes,--
    High-ribbed vault of stone, or cell,
    With perfect cunning framed as well
    Of stone, and ivy, and the spread                           
    Of the elder's bushy head;
    Some jealous and forbidding cell,
    That doth the living stars repel,
    And where no flower hath leave to dwell.

      The presence of this wandering Doe                       
    Fills many a damp obscure recess
    With lustre of a saintly show;
    And, reappearing, she no less
    Sheds on the flowers that round her blow
    A more than sunny liveliness.                
    But say, among these holy places,
    Which thus assiduously she paces,
    Comes she with a votary's task,
    Rite to perform, or boon to ask?
    Fair Pilgrim! harbours she a sense                         
    Of sorrow, or of reverence?
    Can she be grieved for quire or shrine,
    Crushed as if by wrath divine?
    For what survives of house where God
    Was worshipped, or where Man abode;                        
    For old magnificence undone;
    Or for the gentler work begun
    By Nature, softening and concealing,
    And busy with a hand of healing?
    Mourns she for lordly chamber's hearth                     
    That to the sapling ash gives birth;
    For dormitory's length laid bare
    Where the wild rose blossoms fair;
    Or altar, whence the cross was rent,
    Now rich with mossy ornament?
    --She sees a warrior carved in stone,
    Among the thick weeds, stretched alone;
    A warrior, with his shield of pride
    Cleaving humbly to his side,
    And hands in resignation prest,                            
    Palm to palm, on his tranquil breast;
    As little she regards the sight
    As a common creature might:
    If she be doomed to inward care,
    Or service, it must lie elsewhere.                         
    --But hers are eyes serenely bright,
    And on she moves--with pace how light!
    Nor spares to stoop her head, and taste
    The dewy turf with flowers bestrown;
    And thus she fares, until at last
    Beside the ridge of a grassy grave
    In quietness she lays her down;
    Gentle as a weary wave
    Sinks, when the summer breeze hath died,
    Against an anchored vessel's side;                         
    Even so, without distress, doth she
    Lie down in peace, and lovingly.

      The day is placid in its going,
    To a lingering motion bound,
    Like the crystal stream now flowing                        
    With its softest summer sound:
    So the balmy minutes pass,
    While this radiant Creature lies
    Couched upon the dewy grass,
    Pensively with downcast eyes.                              
    --But now again the people raise
    With awful cheer a voice of praise;
    It is the last, the parting song;
    And from the temple forth they throng,
    And quickly spread themselves abroad,                      
    While each pursues his several road.
    But some--a variegated band
    Of middle-aged, and old, and young,
    And little children by the hand
    Upon their leading mothers hung--                          
    With mute obeisance gladly paid
    Turn towards the spot, where, full in view,
    The white Doe, to her service true,
    Her sabbath couch has made.

      It was a solitary mound;                                 
    Which two spears' length of level ground
    Did from all other graves divide:
    As if in some respect of pride;
    Or melancholy's sickly mood,
    Still shy of human neighbourhood;                          
    Or guilt, that humbly would express
    A penitential loneliness.

      "Look, there she is, my Child! draw near;
    She fears not, wherefore should we fear?
    She means no harm;"--but still the Boy,                    
    To whom the words were softly said,
    Hung back, and smiled, and blushed for joy,
    A shamed-faced blush of glowing red!
    Again the Mother whispered low,
    "Now you have seen the famous Doe;                         
    From Rylstone she hath found her way
    Over the hills this sabbath day;
    Her work, whate'er it be, is done,
    And she will depart when we are gone;
    Thus doth she keep, from year to year,                     
    Her sabbath morning, foul or fair."

      Bright was the Creature, as in dreams
    The Boy had seen her, yea, more bright;
    But is she truly what she seems?
    He asks with insecure delight,                             
    Asks of himself, and doubts,--and still
    The doubt returns against his will:
    Though he, and all the standers-by,
    Could tell a tragic history
    Of facts divulged, wherein appear                          
    Substantial motive, reason clear,
    Why thus the milk-white Doe is found
    Couchant beside that lonely mound;
    And why she duly loves to pace
    The circuit of this hallowed place.                        
    Nor to the Child's inquiring mind
    Is such perplexity confined:
    For, spite of sober Truth that sees
    A world of fixed remembrances
    Which to this mystery belong,                              
    If, undeceived, my skill can trace
    The characters of every face,
    There lack not strange delusion here,
    Conjecture vague, and idle fear,
    And superstitious fancies strong,                          
    Which do the gentle Creature wrong.

      That bearded, staff-supported Sire--
    Who in his boyhood often fed
    Full cheerily on convent-bread
    And heard old tales by the convent-fire,                  
    And to his grave will go with scars,
    Relics of long and distant wars--
    That Old Man, studious to expound
    The spectacle, is mounting high
    To days of dim antiquity;                                  
    When Lady Aäliza mourned
    Her Son, and felt in her despair
    The pang of unavailing prayer;
    Her Son in Wharf's abysses drowned,
    The noble Boy of Egremound.
    From which affliction--when the grace
    Of God had in her heart found place--
    A pious structure, fair to see,
    Rose up, this stately Priory!
    The Lady's work;--but now laid low;                        
    To the grief of her soul that doth come and go,
    In the beautiful form of this innocent Doe:
    Which, though seemingly doomed in its breast to sustain
    A softened remembrance of sorrow and pain,
    Is spotless, and holy, and gentle, and bright;             
    And glides o'er the earth like an angel of light.

      Pass, pass who will, yon chantry door;
    And, through the chink in the fractured floor
    Look down, and see a griesly sight;
    A vault where the bodies are buried upright!
    There, face by face, and hand by hand,
    The Claphams and Mauleverers stand;
    And, in his place, among son and sire,
    Is John de Clapham, that fierce Esquire,
    A valiant man, and a name of dread                         
    In the ruthless wars of the White and Red;
    Who dragged Earl Pembroke from Banbury church
    And smote off his head on the stones of the porch!
    Look down among them, if you dare;
    Oft does the White Doe loiter there,                       
    Prying into the darksome rent;
    Nor can it be with good intent:
    So thinks that Dame of haughty air,
    Who hath a Page her book to hold,
    And wears a frontlet edged with gold.                      
    Harsh thoughts with her high mood agree--
    Who counts among her ancestry
    Earl Pembroke, slain so impiously!

      That slender Youth, a scholar pale,
    From Oxford come to his native vale,                       
    He also hath his own conceit:
    It is, thinks he, the gracious Fairy,
    Who loved the Shepherd-lord to meet
    In his wanderings solitary:
    Wild notes she in his hearing sang,                        
    A song of Nature's hidden powers;
    That whistled like the wind, and rang
    Among the rocks and holly bowers.
    'Twas said that She all shapes could wear;
    And oftentimes before him stood,                           
    Amid the trees of some thick wood,
    In semblance of a lady fair;
    And taught him signs, and showed him sights,
    In Craven's dens, on Cumbrian heights;
    When under cloud of fear he lay,                           
    A shepherd clad in homely grey;
    Nor left him at his later day.
    And hence, when he, with spear and shield,
    Rode full of years to Flodden-field,
    His eye could see the hidden spring,                       
    And how the current was to flow;
    The fatal end of Scotland's King,
    And all that hopeless overthrow.
    But not in wars did he delight,
    _This_ Clifford wished for worthier might;                 
    Nor in broad pomp, or courtly state;
    Him his own thoughts did elevate,--
    Most happy in the shy recess
    Of Barden's lowly quietness.
    And choice of studious friends had he                      
    Of Bolton's dear fraternity;
    Who, standing on this old church tower,
    In many a calm propitious hour,
    Perused, with him, the starry sky;
    Or, in their cells, with him did pry                       
    For other lore,--by keen desire
    Urged to close toil with chemic fire;
    In quest belike of transmutations
    Rich as the mine's most bright creations.
    But they and their good works are fled,                   
    And all is now disquieted--
    And peace is none, for living or dead!

      Ah, pensive Scholar, think not so,
    But look again at the radiant Doe!
    What quiet watch she seems to keep,                        
    Alone, beside that grassy heap!
    Why mention other thoughts unmeet
    For vision so composed and sweet?
    While stand the people in a ring,
    Gazing, doubting, questioning;                             
    Yea, many overcome in spite
    Of recollections clear and bright;
    Which yet do unto some impart
    An undisturbed repose of heart.
    And all the assembly own a law                             
    Of orderly respect and awe;
    But see--they vanish one by one,
    And last, the Doe herself is gone.

      Harp! we have been full long beguiled
    By vague thoughts, lured by fancies wild
    To which, with no reluctant strings,
    Thou hast attuned thy murmurings;
    And now before this Pile we stand
    In solitude, and utter peace:
    But, Harp! thy murmurs may not cease--                     
    A Spirit, with his angelic wings,
    In soft and breeze-like visitings,
    Has touched thee--and a Spirit's hand:
    A voice is with us--a command
    To chant, in strains of heavenly glory,                    
    A tale of tears, a mortal story!

    The Harp in lowliness obeyed;
    And first we sang of the green-wood shade
    And a solitary Maid;
    Beginning, where the song must end,
    With her, and with her sylvan Friend;                        
    The Friend, who stood before her sight,
    Her only unextinguished light;
    Her last companion in a dearth
    Of love, upon a hopeless earth.

      For She it was--this Maid, who wrought
    Meekly, with foreboding thought,
    In vermeil colours and in gold
    An unblest work; which, standing by,
    Her Father did with joy behold,--
    Exulting in its imagery;                                
    A Banner, fashioned to fulfil
    Too perfectly his headstrong will:
    For on this Banner had her hand
    Embroidered (such her Sire's command)
    The sacred Cross; and figured there                         
    The five dear wounds our Lord did bear;
    Full soon to be uplifted high,
    And float in rueful company!

      It was the time when England's Queen                      
    Twelve years had reigned, a Sovereign dread;
    Nor yet the restless crown had been
    Disturbed upon her virgin head;
    But now the inly-working North
    Was ripe to send its thousands forth,
    A potent vassalage, to fight                                
    In Percy's and in Neville's right,
    Two Earls fast leagued in discontent,
    Who gave their wishes open vent;
    And boldly urged a general plea,
    The rites of ancient piety                                  
    To be triumphantly restored,
    By the stern justice of the sword!
    And that same Banner on whose breast
    The blameless Lady had exprest
    Memorials chosen to give life                               
    And sunshine to a dangerous strife;
    That Banner, waiting for the Call,
    Stood quietly in Rylstone-hall.

      It came; and Francis Norton said,
    "O Father! rise not in this fray--                          
    The hairs are white upon your head;
    Dear Father, hear me when I say
    It is for you too late a day!
    Bethink you of your own good name:
    A just and gracious queen have we,                          
    A pure religion, and the claim
    Of peace on our humanity.--
    'Tis meet that I endure your scorn;
    I am your son, your eldest born;
    But not for lordship or for land,                          
    My Father, do I clasp your knees;
    The Banner touch not, stay your hand,
    This multitude of men disband,
    And live at home in blameless ease;
    For these my brethren's sake, for me;                       
    And, most of all, for Emily!"

      Tumultuous noises filled the hall;
    And scarcely could the Father hear
    That name--pronounced with a dying fall--
    The name of his only Daughter dear,                         
    As on the banner which stood near
    He glanced a look of holy pride,
    And his moist eyes were glorified;
    Then did he seize the staff, and say:
    "Thou, Richard, bear'st thy father's name,                  
    Keep thou this ensign till the day
    When I of thee require the same:
    Thy place be on my better hand;--
    And seven as true as thou, I see,
    Will cleave to this good cause and me."                     
    He spake, and eight brave sons straightway
    All followed him, a gallant band!

      Thus, with his sons, when forth he came
    The sight was hailed with loud acclaim
    And din of arms and minstrelsy,
    From all his warlike tenantry,
    All horsed and harnessed with him to ride,--
    A voice to which the hills replied!

      But Francis, in the vacant hall,
    Stood silent under dreary weight,--                        
    A phantasm, in which roof and wall
    Shook, tottered, swam before his sight;
    A phantasm like a dream of night!
    Thus overwhelmed, and desolate,
    He found his way to a postern-gate;                         
    And, when he waked, his languid eye
    Was on the calm and silent sky;
    With air about him breathing sweet,
    And earth's green grass beneath his feet;
    Nor did he fail ere long to hear                            
    A sound of military cheer,
    Faint--but it reached that sheltered spot;
    He heard, and it disturbed him not.

      There stood he, leaning on a lance
    Which he had grasped unknowingly,                          
    Had blindly grasped in that strong trance,
    That dimness of heart-agony;
    There stood he, cleansed from the despair
    And sorrow of his fruitless prayer.
    The past he calmly hath reviewed:                          
    But where will be the fortitude
    Of this brave man, when he shall see
    That Form beneath the spreading tree,
    And know that it is Emily?

      He saw her where in open view                            
    She sate beneath the spreading yew--
    Her head upon her lap, concealing
    In solitude her bitter feeling:
    "Might ever son _command_ a sire,
    The act were justified to-day."                            
    This to himself--and to the Maid,
    Whom now he had approached, he said--
    "Gone are they,--they have their desire;
    And I with thee one hour will stay,
    To give thee comfort if I may."                            

      She heard, but looked not up, nor spake;
    And sorrow moved him to partake
    Her silence; then his thoughts turned round,
    And fervent words a passage found.

      "Gone are they, bravely, though misled;                  
    With a dear Father at their head!
    The Sons obey a natural lord;
    The Father had given solemn word
    To noble Percy; and a force
    Still stronger, bends him to his course.                   
    This said, our tears to-day may fall
    As at an innocent funeral.
    In deep and awful channel runs
    This sympathy of Sire and Sons;
    Untried our Brothers have been loved
    With heart by simple nature moved;
    And now their faithfulness is proved:
    For faithful we must call them, bearing
    That soul of conscientious daring.
    --There were they all in circle--there                     
    Stood Richard, Ambrose, Christopher,
    John with a sword that will not fail,
    And Marmaduke in fearless mail,
    And those bright Twins were side by side;
    And there, by fresh hopes beautified,                      
    Stood He, whose arm yet lacks the power
    Of man, our youngest, fairest flower!
    I, by the right of eldest born,
    And in a second father's place,
    Presumed to grapple with their scorn,                  
    And meet their pity face to face;
    Yea, trusting in God's holy aid,
    I to my Father knelt and prayed;
    And one, the pensive Marmaduke,
    Methought, was yielding inwardly,                          
    And would have laid his purpose by,
    But for a glance of his Father's eye,
    Which I myself could scarcely brook.

      "Then be we, each and all, forgiven!
    Thou, chiefly thou, my Sister dear,                    
    Whose pangs are registered in heaven--
    The stifled sigh, the hidden tear,
    And smiles, that dared to take their place,
    Meek filial smiles, upon thy face,
    As that unhallowed Banner grew                             
    Beneath a loving old Man's view.
    Thy part is done--thy painful part;
    Be thou then satisfied in heart!
    A further, though far easier, task
    Than thine hath been, my duties ask;                       
    With theirs my efforts cannot blend,
    I cannot for such cause contend;
    Their aims I utterly forswear;
    But I in body will be there.
    Unarmed and naked will I go,                               
    Be at their side, come weal or woe:
    On kind occasions I may wait,
    See, hear, obstruct, or mitigate.
    Bare breast I take and an empty hand."--
    Therewith he threw away the lance,                         
    Which he had grasped in that strong trance;
    Spurned it, like something that would stand
    Between him and the pure intent
    Of love on which his soul was bent.

      "For thee, for thee, is left the sense                   
    Of trial past without offence
    To God or man; such innocence,
    Such consolation, and the excess
    Of an unmerited distress;
    In that thy very strength must lie.                        
    --O Sister, I could prophesy!
    The time is come that rings the knell
    Of all we loved, and loved so well:
    Hope nothing, if I thus may speak
    To thee, a woman, and thence weak:                         
    Hope nothing, I repeat; for we
    Are doomed to perish utterly:
    'Tis meet that thou with me divide
    The thought while I am by thy side,
    Acknowledging a grace in this,                             
    A comfort in the dark abyss.
    But look not for me when I am gone,
    And be no farther wrought upon:
    Farewell all wishes, all debate,
    All prayers for this cause, or for that!                   
    Weep, if that aid thee; but depend
    Upon no help of outward friend;
    Espouse thy doom at once, and cleave
    To fortitude without reprieve.
    For we must fall, both we and ours--                       
    This Mansion and these pleasant bowers,
    Walks, pools, and arbours, homestead, hall--
    Our fate is theirs, will reach them all;
    The young horse must forsake his manger,
    And learn to glory in a Stranger;                          
    The hawk forget his perch; the hound
    Be parted from his ancient ground:
    The blast will sweep us all away--
    One desolation, one decay!
    And even this Creature!" which words saying,               
    He pointed to a lovely Doe,
    A few steps distant, feeding, straying;
    Fair creature, and more white than snow!
    "Even she will to her peaceful woods
    Return, and to her murmuring floods,                       
    And be in heart and soul the same
    She was before she hither came;
    Ere she had learned to love us all,
    Herself beloved in Rylstone-hall.
    --But thou, my Sister, doomed to be                        
    The last leaf on a blasted tree;
    If not in vain we breathed the breath
    Together of a purer faith;
    If hand in hand we have been led,
    And thou, (O happy thought this day!)                      
    Not seldom foremost in the way;
    If on one thought our minds have fed,
    And we have in one meaning read;
    If, when at home our private weal
    Hath suffered from the shock of zeal,                     
    Together we have learned to prize
    Forbearance and self-sacrifice;
    If we like combatants have fared,
    And for this issue been prepared;
    If thou art beautiful, and youth                           
    And thought endue thee with all truth--
    Be strong;--be worthy of the grace
    Of God, and fill thy destined place:
    A Soul, by force of sorrows high,
    Uplifted to the purest sky                                 
    Of undisturbed humanity!"

      He ended,--or she heard no more;
    He led her from the yew-tree shade,
    And at the mansion's silent door,
    He kissed the consecrated Maid;                            
    And down the valley then pursued,
    Alone, the armèd Multitude.

    Now joy for you who from the towers
    Of Brancepeth look in doubt and fear,
    Telling melancholy hours!
    Proclaim it, let your Masters hear
    That Norton with his band is near!                          
    The watchmen from their station high
    Pronounced the word,--and the Earls descry,
    Well-pleased, the armèd Company
    Marching down the banks of Were.

      Said fearless Norton to the pair                          
    Gone forth to greet him on the plain
    "This meeting, noble Lords! looks fair,
    I bring with me a goodly train;
    Their hearts are with you: hill and dale
    Have helped us: Ure we crossed, and Swale,                 
    And horse and harness followed--see
    The best part of their Yeomanry!
    --Stand forth, my Sons!--these eight are mine,
    Whom to this service I commend;
    Which way soe'er our fate incline,                          
    These will be faithful to the end;
    They are my all"--voice failed him here--
    "My all save one, a Daughter dear!
    Whom I have left, Love's mildest birth,
    The meekest Child on this blessed earth.                    
    I had--but these are by my side,
    These Eight, and this is a day of pride!
    The time is ripe. With festive din
    Lo! how the people are flocking in,--
    Like hungry fowl to the feeder's hand                       
    When snow lies heavy upon the land."

      He spake bare truth; for far and near
    From every side came noisy swarms
    Of Peasants in their homely gear;
    And, mixed with these, to Brancepeth came                   
    Grave Gentry of estate and name,
    And Captains known for worth in arms;
    And prayed the Earls in self-defence
    To rise, and prove their innocence.--
    "Rise, noble Earls, put forth your might                    
    For holy Church, and the People's right!"

      The Norton fixed, at this demand,
    His eye upon Northumberland,
    And said; "The Minds of Men will own
    No loyal rest while England's Crown                         
    Remains without an Heir, the bait
    Of strife and factions desperate;
    Who, paying deadly hate in kind
    Through all things else, in this can find
    A mutual hope, a common mind;                               
    And plot, and pant to overwhelm
    All ancient honour in the realm.
    --Brave Earls! to whose heroic veins
    Our noblest blood is given in trust,
    To you a suffering State complains,                         
    And ye must raise her from the dust.
    With wishes of still bolder scope
    On you we look, with dearest hope;
    Even for our Altars--for the prize
    In Heaven, of life that never dies;                        
    For the old and holy Church we mourn,
    And must in joy to her return.
    Behold!"--and from his Son whose stand
    Was on his right, from that guardian hand
    He took the Banner, and unfurled                            
    The precious folds--"behold," said he,
    "The ransom of a sinful world;
    Let this your preservation be;
    The wounds of hands and feet and side,
    And the sacred Cross on which Jesus died!                   
    --This bring I from an ancient hearth,
    These Records wrought in pledge of love
    By hands of no ignoble birth,
    A Maid o'er whom the blessed Dove
    Vouchsafed in gentleness to brood                          
    While she the holy work pursued."
    "Uplift the Standard!" was the cry
    From all the listeners that stood round,
    "Plant it,--by this we live or die."
    The Norton ceased not for that sound,                       
    But said; "The prayer which ye have heard,
    Much injured Earls! by these preferred,
    Is offered to the Saints, the sigh
    Of tens of thousands, secretly."
    "Uplift it!" cried once more the Band,                      
    And then a thoughtful pause ensued:
    "Uplift it!" said Northumberland--
    Whereat, from all the multitude
    Who saw the Banner reared on high
    In all its dread emblazonry,                                
    A voice of uttermost joy brake out:
    The transport was rolled down the river of Were,
    And Durham, the time-honoured Durham, did hear,
    And the towers of Saint Cuthbert were stirred by the shout!

      Now was the North in arms:--they shine                    
    In warlike trim from Tweed to Tyne,
    At Percy's voice: and Neville sees
    His Followers gathering in from Tees,
    From Were, and all the little rills
    Concealed among the forkèd hills--                         
    Seven hundred Knights, Retainers all
    Of Neville, at their Master's call
    Had sate together in Raby Hall!
    Such strength that Earldom held of yore;
    Nor wanted at this time rich store                         
    Of well-appointed chivalry.
    --Not both the sleepy lance to wield,
    And greet the old paternal shield,
    They heard the summons;--and, furthermore,
    Horsemen and Foot of each degree,
    Unbound by pledge of fealty,
    Appeared, with free and open hate
    Of novelties in Church and State;
    night, burgher, yeoman, and esquire;
    And Romish priest, in priest's attire.                 
    And thus, in arms, a zealous Band
    Proceeding under joint command,
    To Durham first their course they bear;
    And in Saint Cuthbert's ancient seat
    Sang mass,--and tore the book of prayer,--                 
    And trod the bible beneath their feet.

      Thence marching southward smooth and free
    "They mustered their host at Wetherby,
    Full sixteen thousand fair to see;"
    The Choicest Warriors of the North!                        
    But none for beauty and for worth
    Like those eight Sons--who, in a ring,
    (Ripe men, or blooming in life's spring)
    Each with a lance, erect and tall,
    A falchion, and a buckler small,                          
    Stood by their Sire, on Clifford-moor,
    To guard the Standard which he bore.
    On foot they girt their Father round;
    And so will keep the appointed ground
    Where'er their march: no steed will he
    Henceforth bestride;--triumphantly,
    He stands upon the grassy sod,
    Trusting himself to the earth, and God.
    Rare sight to embolden and inspire!
    Proud was the field of Sons and Sire;                      
    Of him the most; and, sooth to say,
    No shape of man in all the array
    So graced the sunshine of that day.
    The monumental pomp of age
    Was with this goodly Personage;                            
    A stature undepressed in size,
    Unbent, which rather seemed to rise,
    In open victory o'er the weight
    Of seventy years, to loftier height;
    Magnific limbs of withered state;                          
    A face to fear and venerate;
    Eyes dark and strong; and on his head
    Bright locks of silver hair, thick spread,
    Which a brown morion half-concealed,
    Light as a hunter's of the field;                          
    And thus, with girdle round his waist,
    Whereon the Banner-staff might rest
    At need, he stood, advancing high
    The glittering, floating Pageantry.

      Who sees him?--thousands see, and One                
    With unparticipated gaze;
    Who, 'mong those thousands, friend hath none,
    And treads in solitary ways.
    He, following wheresoe'er he might,
    Hath watched the Banner from afar,                         
    As shepherds watch a lonely star,
    Or mariners the distant light
    That guides them through a stormy night.
    And now, upon a chosen plot
    Of rising ground, yon heathy spot!                         
    He takes alone his far-off stand,
    With breast unmailed, unweaponed hand.
    Bold is his aspect; but his eye
    Is pregnant with anxiety,
    While, like a tutelary Power,                              
    He there stands fixed from hour to hour:
    Yet sometimes in more humble guise,
    Upon the turf-clad height he lies
    Stretched, herdsman-like, as if to bask
    In sunshine were his only task,
    Or by his mantle's help to find
    A shelter from the nipping wind:
    And thus, with short oblivion blest,
    His weary spirits gather rest.
    Again he lifts his eyes; and lo!                           
    The pageant glancing to and fro;
    And hope is wakened by the sight,
    He thence may learn, ere fall of night,
    Which way the tide is doomed to flow.

      To London were the Chieftains bent;                      
    But what avails the bold intent?
    A Royal army is gone forth
    To quell the RISING OF THE NORTH;
    They march with Dudley at their head,
    And, in seven days' space, will to York be led!--
    Can such a mighty Host be raised                           
    Thus suddenly, and brought so near?
    The Earls upon each other gazed,
    And Neville's cheek grew pale with fear;
    For, with a high and valiant name,                         
    He bore a heart of timid frame;
    And bold if both had been, yet they
    "Against so many may not stay."
    Back therefore will they hie to seize
    A strong Hold on the banks of Tees;                        
    There wait a favourable hour,
    Until Lord Dacre with his power
    From Naworth come; and Howard's aid
    Be with them openly displayed.

      While through the Host, from man to man,                 
    A rumour of this purpose ran,
    The Standard trusting to the care
    Of him who heretofore did bear
    That charge, impatient Norton sought
    The Chieftains to unfold his thought,                      
    And thus abruptly spake;--"We yield
    (And can it be?) an unfought field!--
    How oft has strength, the strength of heaven,
    To few triumphantly been given!
    Still do our very children boast                           
    Of mitred Thurston--what a Host
    He conquered!--Saw we not the Plain
    (And flying shall behold again)
    Where faith was proved?--while to battle moved
    The Standard, on the Sacred Wain                           
    That bore it, compassed round by a bold
    Fraternity of Barons old;
    And with those grey-haired champions stood,
    Under the saintly ensigns three,
    The infant Heir of Mowbray's blood--                       
    All confident of victory!--
    Shall Percy blush, then, for his name?
    Must Westmoreland be asked with shame
    Whose were the numbers, where the loss,
    In that other day of Neville's Cross?
    When the Prior of Durham with holy hand
    Raised, as the Vision gave command,
    Saint Cuthbert's Relic--far and near
    Kenned on the point of a lofty spear;
    While the Monks prayed in Maiden's Bower                   
    To God descending in his power.
    Less would not at our need be due
    To us, who war against the Untrue;--
    The delegates of Heaven we rise,
    Convoked the impious to chastise:                          
    We, we, the sanctities of old
    Would re-establish and uphold:
    Be warned"--His zeal the Chiefs confounded,
    But word was given, and the trumpet sounded:
    Back through the melancholy Host                           
    Went Norton, and resumed his post.
    Alas! thought he, and have I borne
    This Banner raised with joyful pride,
    This hope of all posterity,
    By those dread symbols sanctified;
    Thus to become at once the scorn
    Of babbling winds as they go by,
    A spot of shame to the sun's bright eye,
    To the light clouds a mockery!
    --"Even these poor eight of mine would stem"--
    Half to himself, and half to them                          
    He spake--"would stem, or quell, a force
    Ten times their number, man and horse;
    This by their own unaided might,
    Without their father in their sight,                       
    Without the Cause for which they fight;
    A Cause, which on a needful day
    Would breed us thousands brave as they."
    --So speaking, he his reverend head
    Raised towards that Imagery once more:
    But the familiar prospect shed
    Despondency unfelt before:
    A shock of intimations vain,
    Dismay, and superstitious pain,
    Fell on him, with the sudden thought                       
    Of her by whom the work was wrought:--
    Oh wherefore was her countenance bright
    With love divine and gentle light?
    She would not, could not, disobey,
    But her Faith leaned another way.                          
    Ill tears she wept; I saw them fall,
    I overheard her as she spake
    Sad words to that mute Animal,
    The White Doe, in the hawthorn brake;
    She steeped, but not for Jesu's sake,                      
    This Cross in tears: by her, and One
    Unworthier far we are undone--
    Her recreant Brother--he prevailed
    Over that tender Spirit--assailed
    Too oft alas! by her whose head
    In the cold grave hath long been laid:
    She first, in reason's dawn beguiled
    Her docile, unsuspecting Child:
    Far back--far back my mind must go
    To reach the well-spring of this woe!                      

      While thus he brooded, music sweet
    Of border tunes was played to cheer
    The footsteps of a quick retreat;
    But Norton lingered in the rear,
    Stung with sharp thoughts; and ere the last                
    From his distracted brain was cast,
    Before his Father, Francis stood,
    And spake in firm and earnest mood.

      "Though here I bend a suppliant knee
    In reverence, and unarmed, I bear                          
    In your indignant thoughts my share;
    Am grieved this backward march to see
    So careless and disorderly.
    I scorn your Chiefs--men who would lead,
    And yet want courage at their need:                        
    Then look at them with open eyes!
    Deserve they further sacrifice?--
    If--when they shrink, nor dare oppose
    In open field their gathering foes,
    (And fast, from this decisive day,                         
    Yon multitude must melt away;)
    If now I ask a grace not claimed
    While ground was left for hope; unblamed
    Be an endeavour that can do
    No injury to them or you.
    My Father! I would help to find
    A place of shelter, till the rage
    Of cruel men do like the wind
    Exhaust itself and sink to rest;
    Be Brother now to Brother joined!                          
    Admit me in the equipage
    Of your misfortunes, that at least,
    Whatever fate remain behind,
    I may bear witness in my breast
    To your nobility of mind!"                                 

      "Thou Enemy, my bane and blight!
    Oh! bold to fight the Coward's fight
    Against all good"--but why declare,
    At length, the issue of a prayer
    Which love had prompted, yielding scope                    
    Too free to one bright moment's hope?
    Suffice it that the Son, who strove
    With fruitless effort to allay
    That passion, prudently gave way;
    Nor did he turn aside to prove                             
    His Brothers' wisdom or their love--
    But calmly from the spot withdrew;
    His best endeavours to renew,
    Should e'er a kindlier time ensue.

    'Tis night: in silence looking down,
    The Moon, from cloudless ether, sees
    A Camp, and a beleaguered Town,
    And Castle like a stately crown
    On the steep rocks of winding Tees;--                        
    And southward far, with moor between,
    Hill-top, and flood, and forest green,
    The bright Moon sees that valley small
    Where Rylstone's old sequestered Hall
    A venerable image yields                                    
    Of quiet to the neighbouring fields;
    While from one pillared chimney breathes
    The smoke, and mounts in silver wreaths.
    --The courts are hushed;--for timely sleep
    The grey-hounds to their kennel creep;                      
    The peacock in the broad ash tree
    Aloft is roosted for the night,
    He who in proud prosperity
    Of colours manifold and bright
    Walked round, affronting the daylight;                     
    And higher still, above the bower
    Where he is perched, from yon lone Tower
    The hall-clock in the clear moonshine
    With glittering finger points at nine.

      Ah! who could think that sadness here                     
    Hath any sway? or pain, or fear?
    A soft and lulling sound is heard
    Of streams inaudible by day;
    The garden pool's dark surface, stirred
    By the night insects in their play,                        
    Breaks into dimples small and bright;
    A thousand, thousand rings of light
    That shape themselves and disappear
    Almost as soon as seen:--and lo!
    Not distant far, the milk-white Doe--                       
    The same who quietly was feeding
    On the green herb, and nothing heeding,
    When Francis, uttering to the Maid
    His last words in the yew-tree shade,
    Involved whate'er by love was brought                       
    Out of his heart, or crossed his thought,
    Or chance presented to his eye,
    In one sad sweep of destiny--
    The same fair Creature, who hath found
    Her way into forbidden ground;                              
    Where now--within this spacious plot
    For pleasure made, a goodly spot,
    With lawns and beds of flowers, and shades
    Of trellis-work in long arcades,
    And cirque and crescent framed by wall                     
    Of close-clipt foliage green and tall,
    Converging walks, and fountains gay,
    And terraces in trim array--
    Beneath yon cypress spiring high,
    With pine and cedar spreading wide                         
    Their darksome boughs on either side,
    In open moonlight doth she lie;
    Happy as others of her kind,
    That, far from human neighbourhood,
    Range unrestricted as the wind,                            
    Through park, or chase, or savage wood.

      But see the consecrated Maid
    Emerging from a cedar shade
    To open moonshine, where the Doe
    Beneath the cypress-spire is laid;                          
    Like a patch of April snow--
    Upon a bed of herbage green,
    Lingering in a woody glade
    Or behind a rocky screen--
    Lonely relic! which, if seen                                
    By the shepherd, is passed by
    With an inattentive eye.
    Nor more regard doth She bestow
    Upon the uncomplaining Doe
    Now couched at ease, though oft this day                    
    Not unperplexed nor free from pain,
    When she had tried, and tried in vain,
    Approaching in her gentle way,
    To win some look of love, or gain
    Encouragement to sport or play;                             
    Attempts which still the heart-sick Maid
    Rejected, or with slight repaid.

      Yet Emily is soothed;--the breeze
    Came fraught with kindly sympathies.
    As she approached yon rustic Shed
    Hung with late-flowering woodbine, spread
    Along the walls and overhead,
    The fragrance of the breathing flowers
    Revived a memory of those hours
    When here, in this remote alcove,                          
    (While from the pendent woodbine came
    Like odours, sweet as if the same)
    A fondly-anxious Mother strove
    To teach her salutary fears
    And mysteries above her years.                              
    Yes, she is soothed: an Image faint,
    And yet not faint--a presence bright
    Returns to her--that blessèd Saint
    Who with mild looks and language mild
    Instructed here her darling Child,                         
    While yet a prattler on the knee,
    To worship in simplicity
    The invisible God, and take for guide
    The faith reformed and purified.

      'Tis flown--the Vision, and the sense                    
    Of that beguiling influence;
    "But oh! thou Angel from above,
    Mute Spirit of maternal love,
    That stood'st before my eyes, more clear
    Than ghosts are fabled to appear                           
    Sent upon embassies of fear;
    As thou thy presence hast to me
    Vouchsafed, in radiant ministry
    Descend on Francis; nor forbear
    To greet him with a voice, and say;--                      
    'If hope be a rejected stay,
    Do thou, my Christian Son, beware
    Of that most lamentable snare,
    The self-reliance of despair!'"

      Then from within the embowered retreat                   
    Where she had found a grateful seat
    Perturbed she issues. She will go!
    Herself will follow to the war,
    And clasp her Father's knees;--ah, no!
    She meets the insuperable bar,                           
    The injunction by her Brother laid;
    His parting charge--but ill obeyed--
    That interdicted all debate,
    All prayer for this cause or for that;
    All efforts that would turn aside                         
    The headstrong current of their fate:
    _Her duty is to stand and wait_;
    In resignation to abide
    The shock, AND FINALLY SECURE
    O'ER PAIN AND GRIEF A TRIUMPH PURE.
    --She feels it, and her pangs are checked.
    But now, as silently she paced
    The turf, and thought by thought was chased,
    Came One who, with sedate respect,
    Approached, and, greeting her, thus spake;
    "An old man's privilege I take:
    Dark is the time--a woeful day!
    Dear daughter of affliction, say
    How can I serve you? point the way."

      "Rights have you, and may well be bold:                  
    You with my Father have grown old
    In friendship--strive--for his sake go--
    Turn from us all the coming woe:
    This would I beg; but on my mind
    A passive stillness is enjoined.                           
    On you, if room for mortal aid
    Be left, is no restriction laid;
    You not forbidden to recline
    With hope upon the Will divine."

      "Hope," said the old Man, "must abide                 
    With all of us, whate'er betide.
    In Craven's Wilds is many a den,
    To shelter persecuted men:
    Far under ground is many a cave,
    Where they might lie as in the grave,                      
    Until this storm hath ceased to rave:
    Or let them cross the River Tweed,
    And be at once from peril freed!"

      "Ah tempt me not!" she faintly sighed;
    "I will not counsel nor exhort,                            
    With my condition satisfied;
    But you, at least, may make report
    Of what befals;--be this your task--
    This may be done;--'tis all I ask!"

      She spake--and from the Lady's sight                     
    The Sire, unconscious of his age,
    Departed promptly as a Page
    Bound on some errand of delight.
    --The noble Francis--wise as brave,
    Thought he, may want not skill to save.     
    With hopes in tenderness concealed,
    Unarmed he followed to the field;
    Him will I seek: the insurgent Powers
    Are now besieging Barnard's Towers,--
    "Grant that the Moon which shines this night               
    May guide them in a prudent flight!"

      But quick the turns of chance and change,
    And knowledge has a narrow range;
    Whence idle fears, and needless pain,
    And wishes blind, and efforts vain.--                      
    The Moon may shine, but cannot be
    Their guide in flight--already she
    Hath witnessed their captivity.
    She saw the desperate assault
    Upon that hostile castle made;--                          
    But dark and dismal is the vault
    Where Norton and his sons are laid!
    Disastrous issue!--he had said
    "This night yon faithless Towers must yield,
    Or we for ever quit the field.                             
    --Neville is utterly dismayed,
    For promise fails of Howard's aid;
    And Dacre to our call replies
    That _he_ is unprepared to rise.
    My heart is sick;--this weary pause                        
    Must needs be fatal to our cause.
    The breach is open--on the wall,
    This night,--the Banner shall be planted!"
    --'Twas done: his Sons were with him--all;
    They belt him round with hearts undaunted                  
    And others follow;--Sire and Son
    Leap down into the court;--"'Tis won"--
    They shout aloud--but Heaven decreed
    That with their joyful shout should close
    The triumph of a desperate deed
    Which struck with terror friends and foes!
    The friend shrinks back--the foe recoils
    From Norton and his filial band;
    But they, now caught within the toils,
    Against a thousand cannot stand;--                         
    The foe from numbers courage drew,
    And overpowered that gallant few.
    "A rescue for the Standard!" cried
    The Father from within the walls;
    But, see, the sacred Standard falls!--                     
    Confusion through the Camp spread wide:
    Some fled; and some their fears detained:
    But ere the Moon had sunk to rest
    In her pale chambers of the west,
    Of that rash levy nought remained.                         

    High on a point of rugged ground
    Among the wastes of Rylstone Fell
    Above the loftiest ridge or mound
    Where foresters or shepherds dwell,
    An edifice of warlike frame                                 
    Stands single--Norton Tower its name--
    It fronts all quarters, and looks round
    O'er path and road, and plain and dell,
    Dark moor, and gleam of pool and stream
    Upon a prospect without bound.                              

      The summit of this bold ascent--
    Though bleak and bare, and seldom free
    As Pendle-hill or Pennygent
    From wind, or frost, or vapours wet--
    Had often heard the sound of glee                           
    When there the youthful Nortons met,
    To practice games and archery:
    How proud and happy they! the crowd
    Of Lookers-on how pleased and proud!
    And from the scorching noon-tide sun,
    From showers, or when the prize was won,
    They to the Tower withdrew, and there
    Would mirth run round, with generous fare;
    And the stern old Lord of Rylstone-hall,
    Was happiest, proudest, of them all!                   

      But now, his Child, with anguish pale,
    Upon the height walks to and fro;
    'Tis well that she hath heard the tale,
    Received the bitterness of woe:
    For she _had_ hoped, had hoped and feared,        
    Such rights did feeble nature claim;
    And oft her steps had hither steered,
    Though not unconscious of self-blame;
    For she her brother's charge revered,
    His farewell words; and by the same,                       
    Yea by her brother's very name,
    Had, in her solitude, been cheered.

      Beside the lonely watch-tower stood
    That grey-haired Man of gentle blood,
    Who with her Father had grown old                           
    In friendship; rival hunters they,
    And fellow warriors in their day:
    To Rylstone he the tidings brought;
    Then on this height the Maid had sought,
    And, gently as he could, had told                           
    The end of that dire Tragedy,
    Which it had been his lot to see.

      To him the Lady turned; "You said
    That Francis lives, _he_ is not dead?"

      "Your noble brother hath been spared;                     
    To take his life they have not dared;
    On him and on his high endeavour
    The light of praise shall shine for ever!
    Nor did he (such Heaven's will) in vain
    His solitary course maintain;                               
    Not vainly struggled in the might
    Of duty, seeing with clear sight;
    He was their comfort to the last,
    Their joy till every pang was past.

      "I witnessed when to York they came--                     
    What, Lady, if their feet were tied;
    They might deserve a good Man's blame;
    But marks of infamy and shame--
    These were their triumph, these their pride;
    Nor wanted 'mid the pressing crowd                          
    Deep feeling, that found utterance loud,
    'Lo, Francis comes,' there were who cried,
    'A Prisoner once, but now set free!
    'Tis well, for he the worst defied
    Through force of natural piety;                        
    He rose not in this quarrel, he,
    For concord's sake and England's good,
    Suit to his Brothers often made
    With tears, and of his Father prayed--
    And when he had in vain withstood                           
    Their purpose--then did he divide,
    He parted from them; but at their side
    Now walks in unanimity.
    Then peace to cruelty and scorn,
    While to the prison they are borne,                         
    Peace, peace to all indignity!'

      "And so in Prison were they laid--
    Oh hear me, hear me, gentle Maid,
    For I am come with power to bless,
    By scattering gleams, through your distress,           
    Of a redeeming happiness.
    Me did a reverent pity move
    And privilege of ancient love;
    And, in your service, making bold,
    Entrance I gained to that strong-hold.

      "Your Father gave me cordial greeting;
    But to his purposes, that burned
    Within him, instantly returned:
    He was commanding and entreating,
    And said--'We need not stop, my Son!                        
    Thoughts press, and time is hurrying on'--
    And so to Francis he renewed
    His words, more calmly thus pursued.

      "'Might this our enterprise have sped,
    Change wide and deep the Land had seen,                    
    A renovation from the dead,
    A spring-tide of immortal green:
    The darksome altars would have blazed
    Like stars when clouds are rolled away;
    Salvation to all eyes that gazed,                          
    Once more the Rood had been upraised
    To spread its arms, and stand for aye.
    Then, then--had I survived to see
    New life in Bolton Priory;
    The voice restored, the eye of Truth                       
    Re-opened that inspired my youth;
    To see her in her pomp arrayed--
    This Banner (for such vow I made)
    Should on the consecrated breast
    Of that same Temple have found rest:                       
    I would myself have hung it high,
    Fit offering of glad victory!

      "'A shadow of such thought remains
    To cheer this sad and pensive time;
    A solemn fancy yet sustains                                
    One feeble Being--bids me climb
    Even to the last--one effort more
    To attest my Faith, if not restore.

      "'Hear then,' said he, 'while I impart,
    My Son, the last wish of my heart.                         
    The Banner strive thou to regain;
    And, if the endeavour prove not vain,
    Bear it--to whom if not to thee
    Shall I this lonely thought consign?--
    Bear it to Bolton Priory,                                  
    And lay it on Saint Mary's shrine;
    To wither in the sun and breeze
    'Mid those decaying sanctities.
    There let at least the gift be laid,
    The testimony there displayed;                             
    Bold proof that with no selfish aim,
    But for lost Faith and Christ's dear name,
    I helmeted a brow though white,
    And took a place in all men's sight;
    Yea offered up this noble Brood,                      
    This fair unrivalled Brotherhood,
    And turned away from thee, my Son!
    And left--but be the rest unsaid,
    The name untouched, the tear unshed;--
    My wish is known, and I have done:                         
    Now promise, grant this one request,
    This dying prayer, and be thou blest!'

      "Then Francis answered--'Trust thy Son,
    For, with God's will, it shall be done!'--

      "The pledge obtained, the solemn word
    Thus scarcely given, a noise was heard,
    And Officers appeared in state
    To lead the prisoners to their fate.
    They rose, oh! wherefore should I fear
    To tell, or, Lady, you to hear?                            
    They rose--embraces none were given--
    They stood like trees when earth and heaven
    Are calm; they knew each other's worth,
    And reverently the Band went forth.
    They met, when they had reached the door,                  
    One with profane and harsh intent
    Placed there--that he might go before
    And, with that rueful Banner borne
    Aloft in sign of taunting scorn,
    Conduct them to their punishment:                          
    So cruel Sussex, unrestrained
    By human feeling, had ordained.
    The unhappy Banner Francis saw,
    And, with a look of calm command
    Inspiring universal awe,                                  
    He took it from the soldier's hand;
    And all the people that stood round
    Confirmed the deed in peace profound.
    --High transport did the Father shed
    Upon his Son--and they were led,                           
    Led on, and yielded up their breath;
    Together died, a happy death!--
    But Francis, soon as he had braved
    That insult, and the Banner saved,
    Athwart the unresisting tide
    Of the spectators occupied
    In admiration or dismay,
    Bore instantly his Charge away."

      These things, which thus had in the sight
    And hearing passed of Him who stood                        
    With Emily, on the Watch-tower height,
    In Rylstone's woeful neighbourhood,
    He told; and oftentimes with voice
    Of power to comfort or rejoice;
    For deepest sorrows that aspire,                           
    Go high, no transport ever higher.
    "Yes--God is rich in mercy," said
    The old Man to the silent Maid,
    "Yet, Lady! shines, through this black night,
    One star of aspect heavenly bright;
    Your Brother lives--he lives--is come
    Perhaps already to his home;
    Then let us leave this dreary place."
    She yielded, and with gentle pace,
    Though without one uplifted look,                          
    To Rylstone-hall her way she took.

    Why comes not Francis?--From the doleful City
    He fled,--and, in his flight, could hear
    The death-sounds of the Minster-bell:
    That sullen stroke pronounced farewell
    To Marmaduke, cut off from pity!                             
    To Ambrose that! and then a knell
    For him, the sweet half-opened Flower!
    For all--all dying in one hour!
    --Why comes not Francis? Thoughts of love
    Should bear him to his Sister dear                          
    With the fleet motion of a dove;
    Yea, like a heavenly messenger
    Of speediest wing, should he appear.
    Why comes he not?--for westward fast
    Along the plain of York he past;                            
    Reckless of what impels or leads,
    Unchecked he hurries on;--nor heeds
    The sorrow, through the Villages,
    Spread by triumphant cruelties
    Of vengeful military force,                                
    And punishment without remorse.
    He marked not, heard not, as he fled;
    All but the suffering heart was dead
    For him abandoned to blank awe,
    To vacancy, and horror strong:
    And the first object which he saw,
    With conscious sight, as he swept along--
    It was the Banner in his hand!
    He felt--and made a sudden stand.

      He looked about like one betrayed:                        
    What hath he done? what promise made?
    Oh weak, weak moment! to what end
    Can such a vain oblation tend,
    And he the Bearer?--Can he go
    Carrying this instrument of woe,                           
    And find, find any where, a right
    To excuse him in his Country's sight?
    No; will not all men deem the change
    A downward course, perverse and strange?
    Here is it;--but how? when? must she,                       
    The unoffending Emily,
    Again this piteous object see?

      Such conflict long did he maintain,
    Nor liberty nor rest could gain:
    His own life into danger brought                            
    By this sad burden--even that thought,
    Exciting self-suspicion strong,
    Swayed the brave man to his wrong.
    And how--unless it were the sense
    Of all-disposing Providence,                                
    Its will unquestionably shown--
    How has the Banner clung so fast
    To a palsied, and unconscious hand;
    Clung to the hand to which it passed
    Without impediment? And why                                
    But that Heaven's purpose might be known,
    Doth now no hindrance meet his eye,
    No intervention, to withstand
    Fulfilment of a Father's prayer
    Breathed to a Son forgiven, and blest                       
    When all resentments were at rest,
    And life in death laid the heart bare?--
    Then, like a spectre sweeping by,
    Rushed through his mind the prophecy
    Of utter desolation made                                    
    To Emily in the yew-tree shade:
    He sighed, submitting will and power
    To the stern embrace of that grasping hour.
    "No choice is left, the deed is mine--
    Dead are they, dead!--and I will go,                        
    And, for their sakes, come weal or woe,
    Will lay the Relic on the shrine."

      So forward with a steady will
    He went, and traversed plain and hill;
    And up the vale of Wharf his way                            
    Pursued;--and, at the dawn of day,
    Attained a summit whence his eyes
    Could see the Tower of Bolton rise.
    There Francis for a moment's space
    Made halt--but hark! a noise behind                         
    Of horsemen at an eager pace!
    He heard, and with misgiving mind.
    --'Tis Sir George Bowes who leads the Band:
    They come, by cruel Sussex sent;
    Who, when the Nortons from the hand                         
    Of death had drunk their punishment,
    Bethought him, angry and ashamed,
    How Francis, with the Banner claimed
    As his own charge, had disappeared,
    By all the standers-by revered.                            
    His whole bold carriage (which had quelled
    Thus far the Opposer, and repelled
    All censure, enterprise so bright
    That even bad men had vainly striven
    Against that overcoming light)                              
    Was then reviewed, and prompt word given,
    That to what place soever fled
    He should be seized, alive or dead.

      The troop of horse have gained the height
    Where Francis stood in open sight.                         
    They hem him round--"Behold the proof,"
    They cried, "the Ensign in his hand!
    _He_ did not arm, he walked aloof!
    For why?--to save his Father's land;--
    Worst Traitor of them all is he,                           
    A Traitor dark and cowardly!"

      "I am no Traitor," Francis said,
    "Though this unhappy freight I bear;
    And must not part with. But beware;--
    Err not, by hasty zeal misled,               
    Nor do a suffering Spirit wrong,
    Whose self-reproaches are too strong!"
    At this he from the beaten road
    Retreated towards a brake of thorn,
    That like a place of vantage showed;                  
    And there stood bravely, though forlorn.
    In self-defence with warlike brow
    He stood,--nor weaponless was now;
    He from a Soldier's hand had snatched
    A spear,--and, so protected, watched                       
    The Assailants, turning round and round;
    But from behind with treacherous wound
    A Spearman brought him to the ground.
    The guardian lance, as Francis fell,
    Dropped from him; but his other hand                       
    The Banner clenched; till, from out the Band,
    One, the most eager for the prize,
    Rushed in; and--while, O grief to tell!
    A glimmering sense still left, with eyes
    Unclosed the noble Francis lay--                          
    Seized it, as hunters seize their prey;
    But not before the warm life-blood
    Had tinged more deeply, as it flowed,
    The wounds the broidered Banner showed,
    Thy fatal work, O Maiden, innocent as good!

      Proudly the Horsemen bore away
    The Standard; and where Francis lay
    There was he left alone, unwept,
    And for two days unnoticed slept.
    For at that time bewildering fear                          
    Possessed the country, far and near;
    But, on the third day, passing by
    One of the Norton Tenantry
    Espied the uncovered Corse; the Man
    Shrunk as he recognised the face,                          
    And to the nearest homesteads ran
    And called the people to the place.
    --How desolate is Rylstone-hall!
    This was the instant thought of all;
    And if the lonely Lady there                               
    Should be; to her they cannot bear
    This weight of anguish and despair.
    So, when upon sad thoughts had prest
    Thoughts sadder still, they deemed it best
    That, if the Priest should yield assent                    
    And no one hinder their intent,
    Then, they, for Christian pity's sake,
    In holy ground a grave would make;
    And straightway buried he should be
    In the Church-yard of the Priory.                          

      Apart, some little space, was made
    The grave where Francis must be laid.
    In no confusion or neglect
    This did they,--but in pure respect
    That he was born of gentle blood;                          
    And that there was no neighbourhood
    Of kindred for him in that ground:
    So to the Church-yard they are bound,
    Bearing the body on a bier;
    And psalms they sing--a holy sound                         
    That hill and vale with sadness hear.

      But Emily hath raised her head,
    And is again disquieted;
    She must behold!--so many gone,
    Where is the solitary One?                                 
    And forth from Rylstone-hall stepped she,
    To seek her Brother forth she went,
    And tremblingly her course she bent
    Toward Bolton's ruined Priory.
    She comes, and in the vale hath heard                      
    The funeral dirge;--she sees the knot
    Of people, sees them in one spot--
    And darting like a wounded bird
    She reached the grave, and with her breast
    Upon the ground received the rest,--                       
    The consummation, the whole ruth
    And sorrow of this final truth!

                        "Powers there are
      That touch each other to the quick--in modes
      Which the gross world no sense hath to perceive,
      No soul to dream of."

    Thou Spirit, whose angelic hand
    Was to the harp a strong command,
    Called the submissive strings to wake
    In glory for this Maiden's sake,
    Say, Spirit! whither hath she fled                           
    To hide her poor afflicted head?
    What mighty forest in its gloom
    Enfolds her?--is a rifted tomb
    Within the wilderness her seat?
    Some island which the wild waves beat--                     
    Is that the Sufferer's last retreat?
    Or some aspiring rock, that shrouds
    Its perilous front in mists and clouds?
    High-climbing rock, low sunless dale,
    Sea, desert, what do these avail?                           
    Oh take her anguish and her fears
    Into a deep recess of years!

      'Tis done;--despoil and desolation
    O'er Rylstone's fair domain have blown;
    Pools, terraces, and walks are sown
    With weeds; the bowers are overthrown,
    Or have given way to slow mutation,
    While, in their ancient habitation
    The Norton name hath been unknown.
    The lordly Mansion of its pride                             
    Is stripped; the ravage hath spread wide
    Through park and field, a perishing
    That mocks the gladness of the Spring!
    And, with this silent gloom agreeing,
    Appears a joyless human Being,                         
    Of aspect such as if the waste
    Were under her dominion placed.
    Upon a primrose bank, her throne
    Of quietness, she sits alone;
    Among the ruins of a wood,                             
    Erewhile a covert bright and green,
    And where full many a brave tree stood,
    That used to spread its boughs, and ring
    With the sweet bird's carolling.
    Behold her, like a virgin Queen,                            
    Neglecting in imperial state
    These outward images of fate,
    And carrying inward a serene
    And perfect sway, through many a thought
    Of chance and change, that hath been brought                
    To the subjection of a holy,
    Though stern and rigorous, melancholy!
    The like authority, with grace
    Of awfulness, is in her face,--
    There hath she fixed it; yet it seems                       
    To o'ershadow by no native right
    That face, which cannot lose the gleams,
    Lose utterly the tender gleams,
    Of gentleness and meek delight,
    And loving-kindness ever bright:                            
    Such is her sovereign mien:--her dress
    (A vest with woollen cincture tied,
    A hood of mountain-wool undyed)
    Is homely,--fashioned to express
    A wandering Pilgrim's humbleness.                           

      And she _hath_ wandered, long and far,
    Beneath the light of sun and star;
    Hath roamed in trouble and in grief,
    Driven forward like a withered leaf,
    Yea like a ship at random blown                             
    To distant places and unknown.
    But now she dares to seek a haven
    Among her native wilds of Craven;
    Hath seen again her Father's roof,
    And put her fortitude to proof;                             
    The mighty sorrow hath been borne,
    And she is thoroughly forlorn:
    Her soul doth in itself stand fast,
    Sustained by memory of the past
    And strength of Reason; held above                          
    The infirmities of mortal love;
    Undaunted, lofty, calm, and stable,
    And awfully impenetrable.

      And so--beneath a mouldered tree,
    A self-surviving leafless oak                               
    By unregarded age from stroke
    Of ravage saved--sate Emily.
    There did she rest, with head reclined,
    Herself most like a stately flower,
    (Such have I seen) whom chance of birth                     
    Hath separated from its kind,
    To live and die in a shady bower,
    Single on the gladsome earth.

      When, with a noise like distant thunder,
    A troop of deer came sweeping by;                           
    And, suddenly, behold a wonder!
    For One, among those rushing deer,
    A single One, in mid career
    Hath stopped, and fixed her large full eye
    Upon the Lady Emily;                                        
    A Doe most beautiful, clear-white,
    A radiant creature, silver-bright!

      Thus checked, a little while it stayed;
    A little thoughtful pause it made;
    And then advanced with stealth-like pace,                  
    Drew softly near her, and more near--
    Looked round--but saw no cause for fear;
    So to her feet the Creature came,
    And laid its head upon her knee,
    And looked into the Lady's face,                           
    A look of pure benignity,
    And fond unclouded memory.
    It is, thought Emily, the same,
    The very Doe of other years!--
    The pleading look the Lady viewed,                         
    And, by her gushing thoughts subdued,
    She melted into tears--
    A flood of tears, that flowed apace,
    Upon the happy Creature's face.

      Oh, moment ever blest! O Pair                            
    Beloved of Heaven, Heaven's chosen care,
    This was for you a precious greeting;
    And may it prove a fruitful meeting!
    Joined are they, and the sylvan Doe
    Can she depart? can she forego                             
    The Lady, once her playful peer,
    And now her sainted Mistress dear?
    And will not Emily receive
    This lovely chronicler of things
    Long past, delights and sorrowings?                        
    Lone Sufferer! will not she believe
    The promise in that speaking face;
    And welcome, as a gift of grace,
    The saddest thought the Creature brings?

      That day, the first of a re-union                        
    Which was to teem with high communion,
    That day of balmy April weather,
    They tarried in the wood together.
    And when, ere fall of evening dew,
    She from her sylvan haunt withdrew,                   
    The White Doe tracked with faithful pace
    The Lady to her dwelling-place;
    That nook where, on paternal ground,
    A habitation she had found,
    The Master of whose humble board                           
    Once owned her Father for his Lord;
    A hut, by tufted trees defended,
    Where Rylstone brook with Wharf is blended.

      When Emily by morning light
    Went forth, the Doe stood there in sight.             
    She shrunk:--with one frail shock of pain
    Received and followed by a prayer,
    She saw the Creature once again;
    Shun will she not, she feels, will bear;--
    But, wheresoever she looked round,                         
    All now was trouble-haunted ground;
    And therefore now she deems it good
    Once more this restless neighbourhood
    To leave. Unwooed, yet unforbidden,
    The White Doe followed up the vale,                        
    Up to another cottage, hidden
    In the deep fork of Amerdale;
    And there may Emily restore
    Herself, in spots unseen before.
    --Why tell of mossy rock, or tree,                         
    By lurking Dernbrook's pathless side,
    Haunts of a strengthening amity
    That calmed her, cheered, and fortified?
    For she hath ventured now to read
    Of time, and place, and thought, and deed--                
    Endless history that lies
    In her silent Follower's eyes;
    Who with a power like human reason
    Discerns the favourable season,
    Skilled to approach or to retire,--                        
    From looks conceiving her desire;
    From look, deportment, voice, or mien,
    That vary to the heart within.
    If she too passionately wreathed
    Her arms, or over-deeply breathed,                         
    Walked quick or slowly, every mood
    In its degree was understood;
    Then well may their accord be true,
    And kindliest intercourse ensue.
    --Oh! surely 'twas a gentle rousing                        
    When she by sudden glimpse espied
    The White Doe on the mountain browsing,
    Or in the meadow wandered wide!
    How pleased, when down the Straggler sank
    Beside her, on some sunny bank!                            
    How soothed, when in thick bower enclosed,
    They, like a nested pair, reposed!
    Fair Vision! when it crossed the Maid
    Within some rocky cavern laid,
    The dark cave's portal gliding by,                         
    White as whitest cloud on high
    Floating through the azure sky.
    --What now is left for pain or fear?
    That Presence, dearer and more dear,
    While they, side by side, were straying,                   
    And the shepherd's pipe was playing,
    Did now a very gladness yield
    At morning to the dewy field,
    And with a deeper peace endued
    The hour of moonlight solitude.                            

      With her Companion, in such frame
    Of mind, to Rylstone back she came;
    And, ranging through the wasted groves,
    Received the memory of old loves,
    Undisturbed and undistrest,                                
    Into a soul which now was blest
    With a soft spring-day of holy,
    Mild, and grateful, melancholy:
    Not sunless gloom or unenlightened,
    But by tender fancies brightened.                          

      When the bells of Rylstone played
    Their sabbath music--"=God us ayde!="
    That was the sound they seemed to speak;
    Inscriptive legend which I ween
    May on those holy bells be seen,                           
    That legend and her Grandsire's name;
    And oftentimes the Lady meek
    Had in her childhood read the same;
    Words which she slighted at that day;
    But now, when such sad change was wrought,                 
    And of that lonely name she thought,
    The bells of Rylstone seemed to say,
    While she sate listening in the shade,
    With vocal music, "=God us ayde;="
    And all the hills were glad to bear                        
    Their part in this effectual prayer.

      Nor lacked she Reason's firmest power;
    But with the White Doe at her side
    Up would she climb to Norton Tower,
    And thence look round her far and wide,                    
    Her fate there measuring;--all is stilled,--
    The weak One hath subdued her heart;
    Behold the prophecy fulfilled,
    Fulfilled, and she sustains her part!
    But here her Brother's words have failed;                  
    Here hath a milder doom prevailed;
    That she, of him and all bereft,
    Hath yet this faithful Partner left;
    This one Associate that disproves
    His words, remains for her, and loves.                    
    If tears are shed, they do not fall
    For loss of him--for one, or all;
    Yet, sometimes, sometimes doth she weep
    Moved gently in her soul's soft sleep;
    A few tears down her cheek descend                         
    For this her last and living Friend.

      Bless, tender Hearts, their mutual lot,
    And bless for both this savage spot;
    Which Emily doth sacred hold
    For reasons dear and manifold--                            
    Here hath she, here before her sight,
    Close to the summit of this height,
    The grassy rock-encircled Pound
    In which the Creature first was found.
    So beautiful the timid Thrall                              
    (A spotless Youngling white as foam)
    Her youngest Brother brought it home;
    The youngest, then a lusty boy,
    Bore it, or led, to Rylstone-hall
    With heart brimful of pride and joy!

      But most to Bolton's sacred Pile,
    On favouring nights, she loved to go;
    There ranged through cloister, court, and aisle,
    Attended by the soft-paced Doe;
    Nor feared she in the still moonshine
    To look upon Saint Mary's shrine;
    Nor on the lonely turf that showed
    Where Francis slept in his last abode.
    For that she came; there oft she sate
    Forlorn, but not disconsolate:
    And, when she from the abyss returned
    Of thought, she neither shrunk nor mourned;
    Was happy that she lived to greet
    Her mute Companion as it lay
    In love and pity at her feet;                             
    How happy in its turn to meet
    The recognition! the mild glance
    Beamed from that gracious countenance;
    Communication, like the ray
    Of a new morning, to the nature                            
    And prospects of the inferior Creature!

      A mortal Song we sing, by dower
    Encouraged of celestial power;
    Power which the viewless Spirit shed
    By whom we were first visited;                             
    Whose voice we heard, whose hand and wings
    Swept like a breeze the conscious strings,
    When, left in solitude, erewhile
    We stood before this ruined Pile,
    And, quitting unsubstantial dreams,                        
    Sang in this Presence kindred themes;
    Distress and desolation spread
    Through human hearts, and pleasure dead,--
    Dead--but to live again on earth,
    A second and yet nobler birth;                             
    Dire overthrow, and yet how high
    The re-ascent in sanctity!
    From fair to fairer; day by day
    A more divine and loftier way!
    Even such this blessèd Pilgrim trod,                       
    By sorrow lifted towards her God;
    Uplifted to the purest sky
    Of undisturbed mortality.
    Her own thoughts loved she; and could bend
    A dear look to her lowly Friend;                           
    There stopped; her thirst was satisfied
    With what this innocent spring supplied:
    Her sanction inwardly she bore,
    And stood apart from human cares:
    But to the world returned no more,                         
    Although with no unwilling mind
    Help did she give at need, and joined
    The Wharfdale peasants in their prayers.
    At length, thus faintly, faintly tied
    To earth, she was set free, and died.                      
    Thy soul, exalted Emily,
    Maid of the blasted family,
    Rose to the God from whom it came!
    --In Rylstone Church her mortal frame
    Was buried by her Mother's side.                           

      Most glorious sunset! and a ray
    Survives--the twilight of this day--
    In that fair Creature whom the fields
    Support, and whom the forest shields;
    Who, having filled a holy place,                           
    Partakes, in her degree, Heaven's grace;
    And bears a memory and a mind
    Raised far above the law of kind;
    Haunting the spots with lonely cheer
    Which her dear Mistress once held dear:                    
    Loves most what Emily loved most--
    The enclosure of this church-yard ground;
    Here wanders like a gliding ghost,
    And every sabbath here is found;
    Comes with the people when the bells                       
    Are heard among the moorland dells,
    Finds entrance through yon arch, where way
    Lies open on the sabbath-day;
    Here walks amid the mournful waste
    Of prostrate altars, shrines defaced,                      
    And floors encumbered with rich show
    Of fret-work imagery laid low;
    Paces softly, or makes halt,
    By fractured cell, or tomb, or vault;
    By plate of monumental brass                               
    Dim-gleaming among weeds and grass,
    And sculptured Forms of Warriors brave:
    But chiefly by that single grave,
    That one sequestered hillock green,
    The pensive visitant is seen.                              
    There doth the gentle Creature lie
    With those adversities unmoved;
    Calm spectacle, by earth and sky
    In their benignity approved!
    And aye, methinks, this hoary Pile,                        
    Subdued by outrage and decay,
    Looks down upon her with a smile,
    A gracious smile, that seems to say--
    "Thou, thou art not a Child of Time,
    But Daughter of the Eternal Prime!"                        


      "Listen, lively lordings all,
        Lithe and listen unto mee,
      And I will sing of a noble earle,
        The noblest earle in the north countrie.

      Earle Percy is into his garden gone,
        And after him walks his fair leddie:
      I heard a bird sing in mine ear,
        That I must either fight, or flee.

      Now heaven forefend, my dearest lord,
        That ever such harm should hap to thee:
      But goe to London to the court,
        And fair fall truth and honestie.

      Now nay, now nay, my ladye gay,
        Alas! thy counsell suits not mee;
      Mine enemies prevail so fast,
        That at the court I may not bee.

      O goe to the court yet, good my lord,
        And take thy gallant men with thee;
      If any dare to do you wrong,
        Then your warrant they may bee.

      Now nay, now nay, thou ladye faire,
        The court is full of subtiltie:
      And if I goe to the court, ladye,
        Never more I may thee see.

      Yet goe to the court, my lord, she sayes,
        And I myselfe will ryde wi' thee:
      At court then for my dearest lord,
        His faithful borrowe I will bee.

      Now nay, now nay, my ladye deare;
        Far lever had I lose my life,
      Than leave among my cruell foes
        My love in jeopardy and strife.

      But come thou hither, my little foot-page,
        Come thou hither unto mee,
      To Maister Norton thou must goe
        In all the haste that ever may bee.

      Commend me to that gentleman,
        And beare this letter here fro mee;
      And say that earnestly I praye,
        He will ryde in my companie.

      One while the little foot-page went,
        And another while he ran;
      Untill he came to his journey's end,
        The little foot-page never blan.

      When to that gentleman he came,
        Down he kneeled on his knee;
      And took the letter betwixt his hands,
        And lett the gentleman it see.

      And when the letter it was redd,
        Affore that goodlye companie,
      I wis if you the truthe wold know,
        There was many a weeping eye.

      He sayd, Come thither, Christopher Norton,
        A gallant youth thou seem'st to bee;
      What dost thou counsell me, my sonne,
        Now that good earle's in jeopardy?

      Father, my counselle's fair and free;
        That erle he is a noble lord,
      And whatsoever to him you hight,
        I would not have you breake your word.

      Gramercy, Christopher, my sonne,
        Thy counsell well it liketh mee,
      And if we speed and 'scape with life,
        Well advanced shalt thou bee.

      Come you hither, my nine good sonnes,
        Gallant men I trowe you bee:
      How many of you, my children deare,
        Will stand by that good erle and mee?

      Eight of them did answer make,
        Eight of them spake hastilie,
      O Father, till the day we dye
        We'll stand by that good erle and thee.

      Gramercy, now, my children deare,
        You shew yourselves right bold and brave,
      And whethersoe'er I live or dye,
        A father's blessing you shall have.

      But what say'st thou, O Francis Norton,
        Thou art mine eldest sonne and heire:
      Somewhat lies brooding in thy breast;
        Whatever it bee, to mee declare.

      Father, you are an aged man,
        Your head is white, your beard is gray;
      It were a shame at these your years
        For you to ryse in such a fray.

      Now fye upon thee, coward Francis,
        Thou never learned'st this of mee;
      When thou wert young and tender of age,
        Why did I make soe much of thee?

      But, father, I will wend with you,
        Unarm'd and naked will I bee;
      And he that strikes against the crowne,
        Ever an ill death may he dee.

      Then rose that reverend gentleman,
        And with him came a goodlye band
      To join with the brave Earle Percy,
        And all the flower o' Northumberland.

      With them the noble Nevill came,
        The erle of Westmoreland was hee;
      At Wetherbye they mustered their host,
        Thirteen thousand fair to see.

      Lord Westmorland his ancyent raisde,
        The Dun Bull he rays'd on hye,
      And three Dogs with golden collars
        Were there set out most royallye.

      Erle Percy there his ancyent spread,
        The Halfe Moone shining all soe faire;
      The Nortons ancyent had the Crosse,
        And the five wounds our Lord did beare.

      Then Sir George Bowes he straitwaye rose,
        After them some spoile to make:
      Those noble erles turned back againe,
        And aye they vowed that knight to take.

      That baron he to his castle fled,
        To Barnard castle then fled hee.
      The uttermost walles were eathe to win.
        The earles have wonne them presentlie.

      The uttermost walles were lime and bricke;
        But though they won them soon anone,
      Long ere they wan their innermost walles,
        For they were cut in rocke and stone.

      Then news unto leeve London came
        In all the speed that ever might bee,
      And word is brought to our royall queene
        Of the rysing in the North countrie.

      Her grace she turned her round about,
        And like a royall queene shee swore,
      I will ordayne them such a breakfast,
        As never was in the North before.

      Shee caused thirty thousand men be rays'd,
        With horse and harneis faire to see;
      She caused thirty thousand men be raised
        To take the earles i' th' North countrie.

      Wi' them the false Erle Warwicke went,
        The Erle Sussex and the Lord Hunsden,
      Untill they to York castle came
        I wiss they never stint ne blan.

      Now spred thy ancyent, Westmoreland,
        Thy dun Bull faine would we spye:
      And thou, the Erle of Northumberland,
        Now rayse thy Halfe Moone on hye.

      But the dun bulle is fled and gone,
        And the halfe moone vanished away:
      The Erles, though they were brave and bold,
        Against soe many could not stay.

      Thee, Norton, wi' thine eight good sonnes,
        They doomed to dye, alas! for ruth!
      Thy reverend lockes thee could not save,
        Nor them their faire and blooming youthe.

      Wi' them full many a gallant wight
        They cruellye bereav'd of life:
      And many a child made fatherlesse,
        And widowed many a tender wife.
