On Nature's invitation do I come,
  By Reason sanctioned. Can the choice mislead,
  That made the calmest, fairest spot of earth,
  With all its unappropriated good,
  My own, and not mine only, for with me                         
  Entrenched--say rather peacefully embowered--
  Under yon orchard, in yon humble cot,
  A younger orphan of a home extinct,
  The only daughter of my parents dwells:
  Aye, think on that, my heart, and cease to stir;               
  Pause upon that, and let the breathing frame
  No longer breathe, but all be satisfied.
  Oh, if such silence be not thanks to God
  For what hath been bestowed, then where, where then
  Shall gratitude find rest? Mine eyes did ne'er                 
  Fix on a lovely object, nor my mind
  Take pleasure in the midst of happy thoughts,
  But either she, whom now I have, who now
  Divides with me this loved abode, was there,
  Or not far off. Where'er my footsteps turned,                  
  Her voice was like a hidden bird that sang;
  The thought of her was like a flash of light
  Or an unseen companionship, a breath
  Or fragrance independent of the wind.
  In all my goings, in the new and old                           
  Of all my meditations, and in this
  Favourite of all, in this the most of all....
  Embrace me then, ye hills, and close me in.
  Now in the clear and open day I feel
  Your guardianship: I take it to my heart;                      
  'Tis like the solemn shelter of the night.
  But I would call thee beautiful; for mild,
  And soft, and gay, and beautiful thou art,
  Dear valley, having in thy face a smile,
  Though peaceful, full of gladness. Thou art pleased,           
  Pleased with thy crags, and woody steeps, thy lake,
  Its one green island, and its winding shores,
  The multitude of little rocky hills,
  Thy church, and cottages of mountain-stone
  Clustered like stars some few, but single most,                
  And lurking dimly in their shy retreats,
  Or glancing at each other cheerful looks,
  Like separated stars with clouds between.
