 "On Man, on Nature, and on Human Life,
    Musing in solitude, I oft perceive
    Fair trains of imagery before me rise,
    Accompanied by feelings of delight
    Pure, or with no unpleasing sadness mixed;                     
    And I am conscious of affecting thoughts
    And dear remembrances, whose presence soothes
    Or elevates the Mind, intent to weigh
    The good and evil of our mortal state.
    --To these emotions, whencesoe'er they come,                  
    Whether from breath of outward circumstance,
    Or from the Soul--an impulse to herself--
    I would give utterance in numerous verse.
    Of Truth, of Grandeur, Beauty, Love, and Hope,
    And melancholy Fear subdued by Faith;                         
    Of blessed consolations in distress;
    Of moral strength, and intellectual Power;
    Of joy in widest commonalty spread;
    Of the individual Mind that keeps her own
    Inviolate retirement, subject there                           
    To Conscience only, and the law supreme
    Of that Intelligence which governs all--
    I sing:--'fit audience let me find though few!'

        "So prayed, more gaining than he asked, the Bard--
    In holiest mood. Urania, I shall need                   
    Thy guidance, or a greater Muse, if such
    Descend to earth or dwell in highest heaven!
    For I must tread on shadowy ground, must sink
    Deep--and, aloft ascending, breathe in worlds
    To which the heaven of heavens is but a veil.                 
    All strength--all terror, single or in bands,
    That ever was put forth in personal form--
    Jehovah--with his thunder, and the choir
    Of shouting Angels, and the empyreal thrones--
    I pass them unalarmed. Not Chaos, not                         
    The darkest pit of lowest Erebus,
    Nor aught of blinder vacancy, scooped out
    By help of dreams--can breed such fear and awe
    As fall upon us often when we look
    Into our Minds, into the Mind of Man--                        
    My haunt, and the main region of my song.
    --Beauty--a living Presence of the earth,
    Surpassing the most fair ideal Forms
    Which craft of delicate Spirits hath composed
    From earth's materials--waits upon my steps;                  
    Pitches her tents before me as I move,
    An hourly neighbour. Paradise, and groves
    Elysian, Fortunate Fields--like those of old
    Sought in the Atlantic Main--why should they be
    A history only of departed things,                            
    Or a mere fiction of what never was?
    For the discerning intellect of Man,
    When wedded to this goodly universe
    In love and holy passion, shall find these
    A simple produce of the common day.                           
    --I, long before the blissful hour arrives,
    Would chant, in lonely peace, the spousal verse
    Of this great consummation:--and, by words
    Which speak of nothing more than what we are,
    Would I arouse the sensual from their sleep                   
    Of Death, and win the vacant and the vain
    To noble raptures; while my voice proclaims
    How exquisitely the individual Mind
    (And the progressive powers perhaps no less
    Of the whole species) to the external World                   
    Is fitted:--and how exquisitely, too--
    Theme this but little heard of among men--
    The external World is fitted to the Mind;
    And the creation (by no lower name
    Can it be called) which they with blended might               
    Accomplish:--this is our high argument.
    --Such grateful haunts foregoing, if I oft
    Must turn elsewhere--to travel near the tribes
    And fellowships of men, and see ill sights
    Of madding passions mutually inflamed;                        
    Must hear Humanity in fields and groves
    Pipe solitary anguish; or must hang
    Brooding above the fierce confederate storm
    Of sorrow, barricadoed evermore
    Within the walls of cities--may these sounds                  
    Have their authentic comment; that even these
    Hearing, I be not downcast or forlorn!--
    Descend, prophetic Spirit! that inspir'st
    The human Soul of universal earth,
    Dreaming on things to come; and dost possess               
    A metropolitan temple in the hearts
    Of mighty Poets: upon me bestow
    A gift of genuine insight; that my Song
    With star-like virtue in its place may shine,
    Shedding benignant influence, and secure,                     
    Itself, from all malevolent effect
    Of those mutations that extend their sway
    Throughout the nether sphere!--And if with this
    I mix more lowly matter; with the thing
    Contemplated, describe the Mind and Man                       
    Contemplating; and who, and what he was--
    The transitory Being that beheld
    This Vision; when and where, and how he lived;--
    Be not this labour useless. If such theme
    May sort with highest objects, then--dread Power!
    Whose gracious favour is the primal source                   
    Of all illumination--may my Life
    Express the image of a better time,
    More wise desires, and simpler manners;--nurse
    My Heart in genuine freedom:--all pure thoughts              
    Be with me;--so shall thy unfailing love
    Guide, and support, and cheer me to the end!"