The doubt to which a wavering hope had clung
    Is fled; we must depart, willing or not;
    Sky-piercing Hills! must bid farewell to you
    And all that ye look down upon with pride,
    With tenderness, embosom; to your paths,                           
    And pleasant dwellings, to familiar trees
    And wild-flowers known as well as if our hands
    Had tended them: and O pellucid Spring!
    Unheard of, save in one small hamlet, here
    Not undistinguished, for of wells that ooze                       
    Or founts that gurgle from yon craggy steep,
    Their common sire, thou only bearst his name.
    Insensibly the foretaste of this parting
    Hath ruled my steps, and seals me to thy side,
    Mindful that thou (ah! wherefore by my Muse                       
    So long unthanked) hast cheered a simple board
    With beverage pure as ever fixed the choice
    Of hermit, dubious where to scoop his cell;
    Which Persian kings might envy; and thy meek
    And gentle aspect oft has ministered                              
    To finer uses. They for me must cease;
    Days will pass on, the year, if years be given,
    Fade,--and the moralising mind derive
    No lessons from the presence of a Power
    By the inconstant nature we inherit                               
    Unmatched in delicate beneficence;
    For neither unremitting rains avail
    To swell thee into voice; nor longest drought
    Thy bounty stints, nor can thy beauty mar,
    Beauty not therefore wanting change to stir                       
    The fancy pleased by spectacles unlooked for.
      Nor yet, perchance, translucent Spring, had tolled
    The Norman curfew bell when human hands
    First offered help that the deficient rock
    Might overarch thee, from pernicious heat                         
    Defended, and appropriate to man’s need.
    Such ties will not be severed: but, when we
    Are gone, what summer loiterer will regard,
    Inquisitive, thy countenance, will peruse,
    Pleased to detect the dimpling stir of life,                      
    The breathing faculty with which thou yieldst
    (Tho’ a mere goblet to the careless eye)
    Boons inexhaustible? Who, hurrying on
    With a step quickened by November cold,
    Shall pause, the skill admiring that can work                     
    Upon thy chance defilements withered twigs
    That, lodged within thy crystal depths, seem bright,
    As if they from a silver tree had fallen--
    And oaken leaves that, driven by whirling blasts,
    Sunk down, and lay immersed in dead repose                        
    For Time invisible tooth to prey upon
    Unsightly objects and uncoveted,
    Till thou with crystal bead-drops didst encrust
    Their skeletons, turned to brilliant ornaments.
    But, from thy bosom, should some venturous hand              
    Abstract those gleaming relics, and uplift them,
    However gently, toward the vulgar air,
    At once their tender brightness disappears,
    Leaving the intermeddler to upbraid
    His folly. Thus (I feel it while I speak),                        
    Thus, with the fibres of these thoughts it fares;
    And oh! how much, of all that love creates
    Or beautifies, like changes undergo,
    Suffers like loss when drawn out of the soul,
    Its silent laboratory! Words should say                           
    (Could they depict the marvels of thy cell)
    How often I have marked a plumy fern
    From the live rock with grace inimitable
    Bending its apex toward a paler self
    Reflected all in perfect lineaments--                             
    Shadow and substance kissing point to point
    In mutual stillness; or, if some faint breeze
    Entering the cell gave restlessness to one,
    The other, glassed in thy unruffled breast,
    Partook of every motion, met, retired,                            
    And met again. Such playful sympathy,
    Such delicate caress as in the shape
    Of this green plant had aptly recompensed
    For baffled lips and disappointed arms
    And hopeless pangs, the spirit of that youth,                     
    The fair Narcissus by some pitying God
    Changed to a crimson flower; when he, whose pride
    Provoked a retribution too severe,
    Had pined; upon his watery duplicate
    Wasting that love the nymphs implored in vain.                    
      Thus while my Fancy wanders, thou, clear Spring,
    Moved (shall I say?) like a dear friend who meets
    A parting moment with her loveliest look,
    And seemingly her happiest, look so fair
    It frustrates its own purpose, and recalls                        
    The grieved one whom it meant to send away--
    Dost tempt me by disclosures exquisite
    To linger, bending over thee: for now,
    What witchcraft, mild enchantress, may with thee
    Compare! thy earthly bed a moment past                            
    Palpable to sight as the dry ground,
    Eludes perception, not by rippling air
    Concealed, nor through effect of some impure
    Upstirring; but, abstracted by a charm
    Of my own cunning, earth mysteriously                            
    From under thee hath vanished, and slant beams
    The silent inquest of a western sun,
    Assisting, lucid well-spring! Thou revealest
    Communion without check of herbs and flowers,
    And the vaults hoary sides to which they cling,                 
    Imaged in downward show; the flower, the Herbs,
    _These_ not of earthly texture, and the vault
    Not _there_ diminutive, but through a scale
    Of vision less and less distinct, descending
    To gloom imperishable. So (if truths                             
    The highest condescend to be set forth
    By processes minute), even so--when thought
    Wins help from something greater than herself--
    Is the firm basis of habitual sense
    Supplanted, not for treacherous vacancy                          
    And blank dissociation from a world
    We love, but that the residues of flesh,
    Mirrored, yet not too strictly, may refine
    To Spirit; for the idealising Soul
    Time wears the features of Eternity;                             
    And Nature deepens into Nature God.
      Millions of kneeling Hindoos at this day
    Bow to the watery element, adored
    In their vast stream, and if an age hath been
    (As books and haply votive altars vouch)                         
    When British floods were worshipped, some faint trace
    Of that idolatry, through monkish rites
    Transmitted far as living memory,
    Might wait on thee, a silent monitor,
    On thee, bright Spring, a bashful little one,                    
    Yet to the measure of thy promises
    True, as the mightiest; upon thee, sequestered
    For meditation, nor inopportune
    For social interest such as I have shared.
    Peace to the sober matron who shall dip                          
    Her pitcher here at early dawn, by me
    No longer greeted to the tottering sire,
    For whom like service, now and then his choice,
    Relieves the tedious holiday of age--
    Thoughts raised above the Earth while here he sits               
    Feeding on sunshine--to the blushing girl
    Who here forgets her errand, nothing loth
    To be waylaid by her betrothed, peace
    And pleasure sobered down to happiness!
      But should these hills be ranged by one whose soul             
    Scorning love-whispers shrinks from love itself
    As Fancy snare for female vanity,
    Here may the aspirant find a trysting place
    For loftier intercourse. The Muses crowned
    With wreaths that have not faded to this hour                    
    Sprung from high Jove, of sage Mnemosyne
    Enamoured, so the fable runs; but they
    Certes were self-taught damsels, scattered births
    Of many a Grecian vale, who sought not praise,
    And, heedless even of listeners, warbled out                     
    Their own emotions given to mountain air
    In notes which mountain echoes would take up
    Boldly and bear away to softer life;
    Hence deified as sisters they were bound
    Together in a never-dying choir;                                 
    Who with their Hippocrene and grottoed fount
    Of Castaly, attest that Woman heart
    Was in the limpid age of this stained world
    The most assured seat of 
    And new-born waters, deemed the happiest source                  
    Of inspiration for the conscious lyre.
      Lured by the crystal element in times
    Stormy and fierce, the Maid of Arc withdrew
    From human converse to frequent alone
    The Fountain of the Fairies. What to her,                        
    Smooth summer dreams, old favours of the place.
    Pageant and revels of blithe elves--to her
    Whose country groand under a foreign scourge?
    She pondered murmurs that attuned her ear
    For the reception of far other sounds                            
    Than their too happy minstrelsy,--a Voice
    Reached her with supernatural mandate charged
    More awful than the chambers of dark earth
    Have virtue to send forth. Upon the marge
    Of the benignant fountain, while she stood                       
    Gazing intensely, the translucent lymph
    Darkened beneath the shadow of her thoughts
    As if swift clouds swept oer it, or caught
    War tincture, mid the forest green and still,
    Turned into blood before her heart-sick eye.                     
    Erelong, forsaking all her natural haunts,
    All her accustomed offices and cares
    Relinquishing, but treasuring every law
    And grace of feminine humanity,
    The chosen Rustic urged a warlike steed                          
    Toward the beleaguered city, in the might
    Of prophecy, accoutred to fulfil,
    At the sword point, visions conceived in love.
      The cloud of rooks descending thro mid air
    Softens its evening uproar towards a close
    Near and more near; for this protracted strain
    A warning not unwelcome. Fare thee well!
    Emblem of equanimity and truth,
    Farewell if thy composure be not ours,
    Yet as thou still, when we are gone, wilt keep                   
    Thy living chaplet of fresh flowers and fern,
    Cherished in shade tho’ peeped at by the sun;
    So shall our bosoms feel a covert growth
    Of grateful recollections, tribute due
    To thy obscure and modest attributes                             
    To thee, dear Spring, and all-sustaining Heaven!


    I, whose pretty Voice you hear,
    Lady (you will think it queer),
    Have a Mother, once a Statue,
    I, thus boldly looking at you,
    Do the name of Paphus bear,                                        
    Famd Pygmalion Son and Heir,
    By that wondrous marble wife
    That from Venus took her life.
    Cupid Nephew then am I,
    Nor unskilld his darts to ply;                                   
    But from Him I cravd no warrant,
    Coming thus to seek my Parent;
    Not equippd with bow and quiver
    Her by menace to deliver,
    But resolvd with filial care                                     
    Her captivity to share.
    Hence, while on your toilet, She
    Is doomd a Pincushion to be,
    By her side Ill take my place,
    As a humble Needle-case;                                          
    Furnishd too with dainty thread,
    For a Sempstress thorough-bred.
    Then let both be kindly treated,
    Till the Term, for which She fated
    Durance to sustain, be over;                                      
    So will I ensure a Lover
    Lady! to your heart content;
    But on harshness are you bent
    Bitterly shall you repent,
    When to Cyprus back I go                                          
    And take up my Uncle bow.