 I will relate a tale for those who love
    To lie beside the lonely mountain brooks,
    And hear the voices of the winds and flowers.
    
                                   It befell
    At the first falling of the autumnal snows,
    Old Michael and his son one day went forth
    In search of a stray sheep. It was the time
    When from the heights our shepherds drive their flocks
    To gather all their mountain family
    Into the homestalls, ere they send them back
    There to defend themselves the winter long.
    Old Michael for this purpose had driven down
    His flock into the vale, but as it chanced,
    A single sheep was wanting. They had sought
    The straggler during all the previous day
    All over their own pastures, and beyond.
    And now at sunrise, sallying forth again
    Far did they go that morning: with their search
    Beginning towards the south, where from Dove Crag
    (Ill home for bird so gentle), they looked down
    On Deep-dale-head, and Brothers water (named
    From those two Brothers that were drowned therein);
    Thence northward did they pass by Arthur seat,
    And Fairfield’s highest summit, on the right
    Leaving St. Sunday Crag, to Grisdale tarn
    They shot, and over that cloud-loving hill,
    Seat-Sandal, a fond lover of the clouds;
    Thence up Helvellyn, a superior mount,
    With prospect underneath of Striding edge,
    And Grisdale houseless vale, along the brink
    Of Sheep-cot-cove, and those two other coves,
    Huge skeletons of crags which from the coast
    Of old Helvellyn spread their arms abroad
    And make a stormy harbour for the winds.
    Far went these shepherds in their devious quest,
    From mountain ridges peeping as they passed
    Down into every nook; …
                            … and many a sheep
    On height or bottom did they see, in flocks
    Or single. And although it needs must seem
    Hard to believe, yet could they well discern
    Even at the utmost distance of two miles
    (Such strength of vision to the shepherd’s eye
    Doth practice give) that neither in the flocks
    Nor in the single sheep was what they sought.
    So to Helvellyn eastern side they went,
    Down looking on that hollow, where the pool
    Of Thirlmere flashes like a warrior shield
    His light high up among the gloomy rocks,
    With sight of now and then a straggling gleam
    On Armath pleasant fields. And now they came,
    To that high spring which bears no human name,
    As one unknown by others, aptly called
    The fountain of the mists. The father stooped
    To drink of the clear water, laid himself
    Flat on the ground, even as a boy might do,
    To drink of the cold well. When in like sort
    His son had drunk, the old man said to him
    That now he might be proud, for he that day
    Had slaked his thirst out of a famous well,
    The highest fountain known on British land.
    Thence, journeying on a second time, they passed
    Those small flat stones, which, ranged by traveller hands
    In cyphers on Helvellyn highest ridge,
    Lie loose on the bare turf, some half oergrown
    By the grey moss, but not a single stone
    Unsettled by a wanton blow from foot
    Of shepherd, man or boy. They have respect
    For strangers who have travelled far perhaps,
    For men who in such places, feeling there
    The grandeur of the earth, have left inscribed
    Their epitaph, which rain and snow
    And the strong wind have reverenced.
    …
      But soon as Luke, full ten years old, could stand
    Against the mountain blasts, and to the heights
    Not fearing toil, nor length of weary ways,
    He with his Father daily went, and they
    Were as companions, why should I relate
    That objects which the shepherd lovd before
    Were dearer now? that from the Boy there came
    Feelings and emanations, things which were
    Light to the sun and music to the wind;
    And that the old man heart seemd born again?
      Thus in his Father sight the Boy grew up;
    And now when he had reached his eighteenth year,
    He was his comfort and his daily hope.
    …
    Though often thus industriously they passed 
    Whole hours with but small interchange of speech,
    Yet were there times in which they did not want
    Discourse both wise and pleasant,shrewd remarks
    Of moral prudence, clothed in images
    Lively and beautiful, in rural forms,
    That made their conversation fresh and fair
    As is a landscape; and the shepherd oft
    Would draw out of his heart the mysteries
    And admirations that were there, of God
    And of his works: or, yielding to the bent
    Of his peculiar humour, would let loose
    His tongue, and give it the wind freedom; then,
    Discoursing on remote imaginations, strong
    Conceits, devices, plans, and schemes,
    Of alterations human hands might make
    Among the mountains, fens which might be drained,
    Mines opened, forests planted, and rocks split,
    The fancies of a solitary man.
    Not with a waste of words, but for the sake
    Of pleasure which I know that I shall give
    To many living now, have I described
    Old Michael manners and discourse, and thus
    Minutely spoken of that aged Lamp
    Round which the Shepherd and his household sate
    --The light was famous in the neighbourhood
    And was a public symbol …

                            … At length the boy
    Said, Father tis lost labour; with your leave
    I will go back and range a second time
    The grounds which we have hunted through before
    So saying, homeward, down the hill the boy
    Sprang like a gust of wind and with a heart
    Brimful of glory said within himself,
    “I know where I shall find him, though the storm
    Have driven him twenty miles
    For ye must know]that though the storm
    Drive one of those poor creatures miles and miles,
    If he can crawl, he will return again
    To his own hills, the spots where when a lamb
    He learned to pasture at his mother side.
    Bethinking him of this, again the boy
    Pursued his way toward a brook, whose course
    Was through that unfenced tract of mountain ground
    Which to his father little farm belonged,
    The home and ancient birthright of their flock.
    Down the deep channel of the stream he went,
    Prying through every nook. Meanwhile the rain
    Began to fall upon the mountain tops,
    Thick storm, and heavy, which for three hours’ space
    Abated not; and all that time the boy
    Was busy in his search, until at length
    He spied the sheep upon a plot of grass,
    An island in the brook. It was a place
    Remote and deep, piled round with rocks, where foot
    Of man or beast was seldom used to tread.
    But now, when everywhere the summer grass
    Began to fail, this sheep by hunger pressed
    Had left his fellows, made his way alone
    To the green plot of pasture in the brook.
    Before the boy knew well what he had seen
    He leapt upon the island, with proud heart,
    And with a shepherd’s joy. Immediately
    The sheep sprang forward to the further shore,
    And was borne headlong by the roaring flood.
    At this the boy looked round him, and his heart
    Fainted with fear. Thrice did he turn his face
    To either bank, nor could he summon up
    The courage that was needful to leap back
    ’Cross the tempestuous torrent; so he stood
    A prisoner on the island, not without
    More than one thought of death, and his last hour.
    Meantime the father had returned alone
    To his own home, and now at the approach
    Of evening he went forth to meet his son,
    Nor could he guess the cause for which the boy
    Had stayed so long. The shepherd took his way
    Up his own mountain grounds, where, as he walked
    Along the steep that overhung the brook,
    He seemed to hear a voice, which was again
    Repeated, like the whistling of a kite.
    At this, not knowing why--as often-times
    The old man afterwards was heard to say--
    Down to the brook he went, and tracked its course
    Upwards among the overhanging rocks; nor
    Had he gone far ere he espied the boy
    Right in the middle of the roaring stream.
    Without distress or fear the shepherd heard
    The outcry of his son: he stretched his staff
    Towards him, bade him leap, which word scarce said
    The boy was safe


    No doubt if you in terms direct had asked
    Whether he loved the mountains, true it is
    That with blunt repetition of your words
    He might have stared at you, and said that they
    Were frightful to behold, but had you then
    Discoursed with him …
    Of his own business, and the goings on
    Of earth and sky, then truly had you seen
    That in his thoughts there were obscurities,
    Wonder, and admiration, things that wrought
    Not less than a religion in his heart.
    And if it was his fortune to converse
    With any who could talk of common things
    In an unusual way, and give to them
    Unusual aspects, or by questions apt
    Wake sudden recognitions, that were like
    Creations in the mind (and were indeed
    Creations often), then when he discoursed
    Of mountain sights, this untaught shepherd stood
    Before the man with whom he so conversed
    And looked at him as with a poet eye.
    But speaking of the vale in which he dwelt,
    And those bare rocks, if you had asked if he
    For other pastures would exchange the same
    And dwell elsewhere, …
                          … you then had seen
    At once what spirit of love was in his heart.
    …
    I have related that this Shepherd loved
    The fields and mountains, not alone for this
    That from his very childhood he had lived
    Among them, with a body hale and stout,
    And with a vigorous mind …
                              … But exclude
    Such reasons, and he had less cause to love
    His native vale and patrimonial fields
    Than others have, for Michael had liv’d on
    Childless, until the time when he began
    To look towards the shutting in of life.
