  Right gladly had the horses stirred,
  When they the wished for greeting heard,                         
  The whips loud notice from the door,
  That they were free to move once more.
  You think, those doings must have bred
  In them disheartening doubts and dread;
  No, not a horse of all the eight,                                
  Although it be a moonless night,
  Fears either for himself or freight;
  For this they know and let it hide,
  In part, the offences of their guide
  That Benjamin, with clouded brains,                              
  Is worth the best with all their pains;
  And, if they had a prayer to make,
  The prayer would be that they may take
  With him whatever comes in course,
  The better fortune or the worse;                                 
  That no one else may have business near them,
  And, drunk or sober, he may steer them.

    So, forth in dauntless mood they fare,
  And with them goes the guardian pair.

    Now, heroes, for the true commotion,                           
  The triumph of your late devotion!
  Can aught on earth impede delight,
  Still mounting to a higher height;
  And higher still a greedy flight!
  Can any lowborn care pursue her,                                
  Can any mortal clog come to her? 
  No notion have they not a thought,
  That is from joyless regions brought!
  And, while they coast the silent lake,
  Their inspiration I partake;                                     
  Share their empyreal spirits yea,
  With their enraptured vision, see
  O fancy what a jubilee!
  What shifting pictures clad in gleams
  Of colour bright as feverish dreams!                             
  Earth, spangled sky, and lake serene,
  Involved and restless all a scene
  Pregnant with mutual exaltation,
  Rich change, and multiplied creation!
  This sight to me the Muse imparts;
  And then, what kindness in their hearts!
  What tears of rapture, what vow making,
  Profound entreaties, and hand shaking!
  What solemn, vacant, interlacing,
  As if theyd fall asleep embracing!                              
  Then, in the turbulence of glee,
  And in the excess of amity,
  Says Benjamin, "That Ass of thine,
  He spoils thy sport, and hinders mine:
  If he were tethered to the waggon,                               
  Hed drag as well what he is dragging;
  And we, as brother should with brother,
  Might trudge it alongside each other!"

    Forthwith, obedient to command,
  The horses made a quiet stand;                                   
  And to the waggons skirts was tied
  The Creature, by the Mastiffs side,
  The Mastiff wondering, and perplext
  With dread of what will happen next;
  And thinking it but sorry cheer,                                 
  To have such company so near! 

    This new arrangement made, the Wain
  Through the still night proceeds again;
  No Moon hath risen her light to lend;
  But indistinctly may be kenned                                   
  The VANGUARD, following close behind,
  Sails spread, as if to catch the wind!

    "Thy wife and child are snug and warm,
  Thy ship will travel without harm;
  I like," said Benjamin, "her shape and stature:                  
  And this of mine this bulky creature
  Of which I have the steering this,
  Seen fairly, is not much amiss!
  We want your streamers, friend, you know;
  But, altogether as we go,                                   
  We make a kind of handsome show!
  Among these hills, from first to last,
  Weve weathered many a furious blast;
  Hard passage forcing on, with head
  Against the storm, and canvass spread.                           
  I hate a boaster; but to thee
  Will sayt, who knowst both land and sea,
  The unluckiest hulk that stems the brine
  Is hardly worse beset than mine,
  When crosswinds on her quarter beat;                            
  And, fairly lifted from my feet,
  I stagger onward heaven knows how;
  But not so pleasantly as now:
  Poor pilot I, by snows confounded,
  And many a foundrous pit surrounded!                             
  Yet here we are, by night and day
  Grinding through rough and smooth our way;
  Through foul and fair our task fulfilling;
  And long shall be so yet God willing!"

    "Ay," said the Tar, "through fair and foul
  But save us from yon screeching owl!"
  That instant was begun a fray
  Which called their thoughts another way:
  The mastiff, ill conditioned carl!
  What must he do but growl and snarl,                             
  Still more and more dissatisfied
  With the meek comrade at his side!
  Till, not incensed though put to proof,
  The Ass, uplifting a hind hoof,
  Salutes the Mastiff on the head;                                 
  And so were better manners bred,
  And all was calmed and quieted.

    "Yon screech owl," says the Sailor, turning
  Back to his former cause of mourning,
  "Yon owl! pray God that all be well!                            
  Tis worse than any funeral bell;
  As sure as I've the gift of sight,
  We shall be meeting ghosts tonight!"
Said Benjamin, "This whip shall lay
  A thousand, if they cross our way.                               
  I know that Wantons noisy station,
  I know him and his occupation;
  The jolly bird hath learned his cheer
  Upon the banks of Windermere;
  Where a tribe of them make merry,                                
  Mocking the Man that keeps the ferry;
  Hallooing from an open throat,
  Like travellers shouting for a boat.
The tricks he learned at Windermere
  This vagrant owl is playing here
  That is the worst of his employment:
  Hes at the top of his enjoyment!"

    This explanation stilled the alarm,
  Cured the foreboder like a charm;
  This, and the manner, and the voice,                            
  Summoned the Sailor to rejoice;
  His heart is up he fears no evil
  From life or death, from man or devil;
  He wheels and, making many stops,
  Brandished his crutch against the mountain tops;                 
  And, while he talked of blows and scars,
  Benjamin, among the stars,
  Beheld a dancing and a glancing;
  Such retreating and advancing
  As, I ween, was never seen                                       
  In bloodiest battle since the days of Mars!

