 List, the winds of March are blowing;
    Her ground-flowers shrink, afraid of showing
    Their meek heads to the nipping air,
    Which ye feel not, happy pair!
    Sunk into a kindly sleep.                                          
    We, meanwhile, our hope will keep;
    And if Time leagued with adverse Change
    (Too busy fear!) shall cross its range,
    Whatsoever check they bring,
    Anxious duty hindering,                                           
    To like hope our prayers will cling.

      Thus, while the ruminating spirit feeds
    Upon the events of home as life proceeds,
    Affections pure and holy in their source
    Gain a fresh impulse, run a livelier course;                      
    Hopes that within the Fathers heart prevail,
    Are in the experienced Grandsires slow to fail;
    And if the harp pleased his gay youth, it rings
    To his grave touch with no unready strings,
    While thoughts press on, and feelings overflow,                   
    And quick words round him fall like flakes of snow.

      Thanks to the Powers that yet maintain their sway,
    And have renewed the tributary Lay.
    Truths of the heart flock in with eager pace,
    And FANCY greets them with a fond embrace;                        
    Swift as the rising sun his beams extends
    She shoots the tidings forth to distant friends;
    Their gifts she hails deemed precious, as they prove
    For the unconscious Babe so prompt a love!
    But from this peaceful centre of delight                          
    Vague sympathies have urged her to take flight:
    Rapt into upper regions, like the bee
    That sucks from mountain heath her honey fee;
    Or, like the warbling lark intent to shroud
    His head in sunbeams or a bowery cloud,                           
    She soars and here and there her pinions rest
    On proud towers, like this humble cottage, blest
    With a new visitant, an infant guest
    Towers where red streamers flout the breezy sky
    In pomp foreseen by her creative eye,                             
    When feasts shall crowd the hall, and steeple bells
    Glad proclamation make, and heights and dells
    Catch the blithe music as it sinks and swells,
    And harboured ships, whose pride is on the sea,
    Shall hoist their topmost flags in sign of glee,                  
    Honouring the hope of noble ancestry.

      But who though neither reckoning ills assigned
    By Nature, nor reviewing in the mind
    The track that was, and is, and must be, worn
    With weary feet by all of woman born                          
    Shall now by such a gift with joy be moved,
    Nor feel the fulness of that joy reproved?
    Not He, whose last faint memory will command
    The truth that Britain was his native land;
    Whose infant soul was tutored to confide                          
    In the cleansed faith for which her martyrs died;
    Whose boyish ear the voice of her renown
    With rapture thrilled; whose Youth revered the crown
    Of Saxon liberty that Alfred wore,
    Alfred, dear Babe, thy great Progenitor!                          
    Not He, who from her mellowed practice drew
    His social sense of just, and fair, and true;
    And saw, thereafter, on the soil of France
    Rash Polity begin her maniac dance,
    Foundations broken up, the deeps run wild,                        
    Nor grieved to see himself not unbeguiled
    Woke from the dream, the dreamer to upbraid,
    And learn how sanguine expectations fade
    When novel trusts by folly are betrayed,
    To see Presumption, turning pale, refrain                         
    From further havoc, but repent in vain,
    Good aims lie down, and perish in the road
    Where guilt had urged them on with ceaseless goad.
    Proofs thickening round her that on public ends
    Domestic virtue vitally depends,                                  
    That civic strife can turn the happiest hearth
    Into a grievous sore of self tormenting earth.

      Can such a One, dear Babe! though glad and proud
    To welcome thee, repel the fears that crowd
    Into his English breast, and spare to quake                       
    Less for his own than for thy innocent sake?
    Too late or, should the providence of God
    Lead, through dark ways by sin and sorrow trod,
    Justice and peace to a secure abode,
    Too soon thou comst into this breathing world;                  
    Ensigns of mimic outrage are unfurled.
    Who shall preserve or prop the tottering Realm?
    What hand suffice to govern the state helm?
    If, in the aims of men, the surest test
    Of good or bad whateer be sought for or profest                
    Lie in the means required, or ways ordained,
    For compassing the end, else never gained;
    Yet governors and governd both are blind
    To this plain truth, or fling it to the wind;
    If to expedience principle must bow;                              
    Past, future, shrinking up beneath the incumbent Now;
    If cowardly concession still must feed
    The thirst for power in men who neer concede;
    Nor turn aside, unless to shape a way
    For domination at some riper day;                                
    If generous Loyalty must stand in awe
    Of subtle Treason, in his mask of law,
    Or with bravado insolent and hard,
    Provoking punishment, to win reward;
    If office help the factious to conspire,                         
    And they who should extinguish, fan the fire
    Then, will the sceptre be a straw, the crown
    Sit loosely, like the thistles crest of down;
    To be blown off at will, by Power that spares it
    In cunning patience, from the head that wears it.                

      Lost people, trained to theoretic feud!
    Lost above all, ye labouring multitude!
    Bewildered whether ye, by slanderous tongues
    Deceived, mistake calamities for wrongs;
    And over fancied usurpations brood,                              
    Oft snapping at revenge in sullen mood;
    Or, from long stress of real injuries fly
    To desperation for a remedy;
    In bursts of outrage spread your judgments wide,
    And to your wrath cry out, "Be thou our guide;"                  
    Or, bound by oaths, come forth to tread earths floor
    In marshalled thousands, darkening street and moor
    With the worst shape mock patience ever wore;
    Or, to the giddy top of self esteem
    By Flatterers carried, mount into a dream                        
    Of boundless suffrage, at whose sage behest
    Justice shall rule, disorder be supprest,
    And every man sit down as Plenty's Guest!
    O for a bridle bitted with remorse
    To stop your Loaders in their headstrong course!
    Oh may the Almighty scatter with his grace
    These mists, and lead you to a safer place,
    By paths no human wisdom can foretrace!
    May He pour round you, from worlds far above
    Man's feverish passions, his pure light of love,                 
    That quietly restores the natural mien
    To hope, and makes truth willing to be seen!
    Else shall your blood stained hands in frenzy reap
    Fields gaily sown when promises were cheap.
    Why is the Past belied with wicked art,                          
    The Future made to play so false a part,
    Among a people famed for strength of mind,
    Foremost in freedom, noblest of mankind?
    We act as if we joyed in the sad tune
    Storms make in rising, valued in the moon                        
    Nought but her changes. Thus, ungrateful Nation!
    If thou persist, and, scorning moderation,
    Spread for thyself the snares of tribulation,
    Whom, then, shall meekness guard? What saving skill
    Lie in forbearance, strength in standing still?                  
    Soon shall the widow for the speed of Time
    Nought equals when the hours are winged with crime
    Widow, or wife, implore on tremulous knee,
    From him who judged her lord, a like decree;
    The skies will weep oer old men desolate:                       
    Ye little ones! Earth shudders at your fate,
    Outcasts and homeless orphans

      But turn, my Soul, and from the sleeping pair
    Learn thou the beauty of omniscient care!
    Be strong in faith, bid anxious thoughts lie still;              
    Seek for the good and cherish it the ill
    Oppose, or bear with a submissive will.