
    How beautiful when up a lofty height
    Honour ascends among the humblest poor,
    And feeling sinks as deep! See there the door
    Of One, a Widow, left beneath a weight
    Of blameless debt. On evil Fortunes spite                         
    She wasted no complaint, but strove to make
    A just repayment, both for conscience-sake
    And that herself and hers should stand upright
    In the worlds eye. Her work when daylight failed
    Paused not, and through the depth of night she kept               
    Such earnest vigils, that belief prevailed
    With some, the noble Creature never slept;
    But, one by one, the hand of death assailed
    Her children from her inmost heart bewept.

                   

    The Mother mourned, nor ceased her tears to flow,                 
    Till a winters noonday placed her buried Son
    Before her eyes, last child of many gone
    His raiment of angelic white, and lo!
    His very feet bright as the dazzling snow
    Which they are touching; yea far brighter, even                   
    As that which comes, or seems to come, from heaven,
    Surpasses aught these elements can show.
    Much she rejoiced, trusting that from that hour
    Whateer befel she could not grieve or pine;
    But the Transfigured, in and out of season,                       
    Appeared, and spiritual presence gained a power
    Over material forms that mastered reason.
    Oh, gracious Heaven, in pity make her thine!


    But why that prayer? as if to her could come
    No good but by the way that leads to bliss                        
    Through Death, so judging we should judge amiss.
    Since reason failed want is her threatened doom,
    Yet frequent transports mitigate the gloom:
    Nor of those maniacs is she one that kiss
    The air or laugh upon a precipice;                               
    No, passing through strange sufferings toward the tomb,
    She smiles as if a martyrs crown were won:
    Oft, when light breaks through clouds or waving trees,
    With outspread arms and fallen upon her knees
    The Mother hails in her descending Son                            
    An Angel, and in earthly ecstasies
    Her own angelic glory seems begun.